MgPn40


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城阿耆羅河彼岸。請二部僧食。比丘比丘尼俱欲渡。比丘言。世尊制戒。不得共船載。比丘二人三人輕船而渡。渡盡比丘尼渡。渡已問歲數。日時已過。時大愛道失食飢羸。到世尊所頭面作禮却住一面。佛知而故問。何故飢色。即以是事具白世尊。佛言。從今日後。上座八人。當次第如法。餘者隨到而坐。若五年大會多人集。比丘尼上座八人當次第坐。餘者隨意坐。若八人不隨次第坐。越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. Both sanghas had been invited for a meal on the far shore of the river Aciravatī, and the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs all wanted to cross over. The bhikkhus said: “The World-honored One has laid down the precept that we may not board a boat together.” The bhikkhus boarded in groups of two and three to keep the boat light, and crossed over. When they had all crossed, the bhikkhunīs crossed over. When they had crossed, they asked each other for their seniority. The time passed, so Mahāpajāpatī missed her meal, and was hungry and weak. She went to the World-honored One, paid respect, and stood at one side. The Buddha knew about this, and intentionally asked her: “Why are you hungry?” Then she fully informed the World-honored One about this matter. The Buddha said: “From now on, the eight most senior persons should sit in order of seniority according to dhamma. The others should sit as they arrive. If many people gather for the great festival every five years, the eight most senior bhikkhunīs should sit in order of seniority. The others should sit as they like. If the eight persons don’t sit in order of seniority, they break a minor vinaya rule.” This is what the World-honored One said.




<beginh2>Summary Verse<endh2>


<beginchinese>二眾淨不同 三非比丘僧
三非比丘尼 無殘八上座
第五跋渠竟<endchinese>

<beginverse>For the two sanghas purity isn’t the same, three reasons for not being a bhikkhu,
Three reasons for not being a bhikkhunī, no leftovers, the eight seniors,
The fifth chapter is finished.<endverse>




<beginh2>Conclusion<endh2>


<beginchinese>比丘雜跋渠中。別住蒜傘蓋。乘刀治革屣同床臥坐伎樂九事應出不說。餘十三跋渠殘比丘尼別。五雜跋渠威儀中。阿練若浴室廁屋縫衣簟應出不說。餘盡同比丘尼。二部修多羅及學五百戒。世尊分別說戒序。八波羅夷。十九僧伽婆尸沙。三十尼薩耆波夜提。百四十一波夜提。八波羅提提舍尼。六十四眾學。七止諍法。法隨順法偈在後。比丘尼比尼竟。<endchinese>

From the bhikkhus’ collection of miscellaneous rules (pakiṇṇaka), the nine rules on living apart, garlic, umbrellas, vehicles, wielding a knife, leather sandals, sleeping together on one bed, sitting together on one bed, and dancing and music, should be removed and not recited. The remaining of the other 13 chapters are different from the bhikkhunīs’ rules.<beginnote>It’s not clear to me how it should make sense to remove nine rules, and then not share any of the rest. When comparing it with the Lokuttaravāda parallel, it seems obvious that this text is corrupted. The Lo gives instructions to remove the nine rules as above from various places in the bhikkhu pakiṇṇaka, and to replace them with other nine rules from the 12th chapter of the bhikkhu pakiṇṇaka. The 12th chapter is thus completely broken up, and integrated in the other chapters. Therefore, of the original 14 chapters, 13 remain, which are all shared between bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs.<endnote>
Five rules from the Abhisamācārika should be removed and not recited: wilderness, bathrooms, toilets, sewing robes, and bamboo mats. The remaining are all shared with the bhikkhunīs. 
These are the pātimokkhas for the two sanghas and the 500 training precepts that the World-honored One has revealed: the introduction, the eight eight pārājika rules, the 19 saṅghādisesa rules, the 30 nissaggiya pācittiya rules, the 141 pācittiya rules, the eight pātidesanīya rules, the 64 training rules (sekhiyas), the seven rules to settle disputes, the dhammas and anudhammas, and lastly the verses. End of the bhikkhunī vinaya.
