MgPn31


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時有大臣犯王法。其家財物盡應沒官。王即遣人守護。時偷蘭難陀比丘尼乞食次到其家。婦人語言。阿梨耶。我家有事犯王罪應至死。財物入官。我欲寄少寶物嚴飾之具。若我得脫當相顧直。我若死者即持相施。時比丘尼即與鉢盛雜寶。覆已而去。時守門人見之問言。鉢中何物而不示之。又復叱喚畏而示之。比丘尼聞已往白。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽覆鉢寶物。若有犯官事未被收錄。又未籍其財。爾時寄者得取。若王收攝又籍其財。應語言。世尊制戒不得受是。若言我與塔與僧施汝得取。得已不得覆上而去。當露持去。若有問者當言。塔物僧物我物。若聽去者善。若不聽者當還。是名覆鉢法。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a high official who had broken the king’s law. His house and all his wealth were to be confiscated by the authorities, and the king had sent men to guard (the place). Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī reached that house on her continuous almsround. The woman said: “Venerable, there’s a problem in my family. We’ve broken the king’s law, and will be put to death. Our wealth will be taken by the authorities. I want to entrust a few jewels and ornaments to you. If I’m released, I’ll take them back from you at once. If I die, then take them as an offering.” The bhikkhunī then filled her bowl with various jewels, covered it, and left. When the guards at the door saw her, they asked: “What’s in your bowl?”, but she didn’t show them. They again shouted at her. She got fearful and showed it. When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they went and informed … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to hide jewels in a bowl. If there’s an official who has broken the law, and an inventory hasn’t been made yet, and his wealth hasn’t been taken stock of yet, if at such a time (a bhikkhunī) is entrusted, she may take it. If the king has made an inventory, and taken stock of his wealth, she should say: “The World-honored One has laid down a precept that one may not accept this.” If they say: “We give it to a stupa, or to the sangha, or we offer it to you,” she may take it. When she has obtained it, she may not cover it up and go. She should go carrying it openly. If someone asks, she should say: “These are items for a stupa, or the sangha’s items, or my items.” If she’s allowed to go, it’s good. If she’s not allowed, she should return them. This is called the rule on covering the bowl.