MgPn29


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時須提那死婦出家。其叔常欲使罷道。時比丘尼入聚落乞食。叔遇見之即欲捉取。便走入一大家內。語婦人言。異事幾當壞我梵行。問何故。答言。叔欲罷我道。婦人言。莫恐我當相護。比丘尼言。我欲向和上邊去。婦人言。汝欲去者當著俗服假異摽相。乃可得脫。即著臂釧耳鐶俗人服飾。又將四五人侍從而去。其叔於外見之念言。此非比丘尼。是俗人耳。到住處已諸比丘尼呵言。汝何故著此。答言。我叔欲取我。方便自護故假著此耳。諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。呼比丘尼來。來已佛問汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。汝云何壞威儀。從今已後。不聽壞威儀。若決定壞威儀者非比丘尼。若方便自護故壞威儀越比尼罪。故名比丘尼。若比丘尼決定壞威儀者偷蘭遮。若方便自護無罪。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Sudinna had died, and his wife went forth. But her brother-in-law constantly wanted to make her disrobe. Then the bhikkhunī entered the village on almsround. Her brother-in-law met her, and then wanted to get hold of her. So she entered a great house, and said to the woman: “Something unusual happened. I nearly was raped.” She asked “Why?” (The bhikkhunī) answered: “My brother-in-law wants to disrobe me.” The woman said: “Don’t worry, I’ll protect you.” The bhikkhunī said: “I want to go and be with my preceptor.” The woman said: “If you want to go, you should put on lay clothes to give you a different appearance. Then you can escape.” So she put on bracelets and earrings, and lay clothes and accessories. And attended on by four or five people, she left. Her brother-in-law saw her outside, and thought: “This isn’t the bhikkhunī. It’s just a lay woman.” When she reached her residence, the bhikkhunīs criticized her: “Why are you wearing this?” She answered: “My brother-in-law wanted to get hold of me. As a means to protect me, I put on these things.” The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she then fully informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “Why did you break proper conduct? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to break proper conduct. If (a bhikkhunī) decides to break proper conduct, she’s no longer a bhikkhunī. If as a means to protect herself she breaks proper conduct, she breaks a minor vinaya rule, but she’s still a bhikkhunī. If a bhikkhu(nī)<note>This must be a typo in the source text. It only makes sense to read it as “bhikkhu”.</note> decides to break proper conduct, it’s a thullaccaya. If it’s a means to protect himself, there is no offense.” 




<h2>Summary Verse</h2>


<lzh>羯磨憍舍耶 僧祇支客嚴
種花須曼那 結鬘并紡縷
壞威儀最後 第三跋渠竟</lzh>

<verse>Saṅghakamma, silk, the vest, beautifying clients,
Planting flowers, jasmine, binding garlands, spinning thread,
And finally breaking proper conduct, the third chapter is finished.</verse>