MgPn11


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼住處。與俗人隔壁。比丘尼欲心起自手拍陰。時丈夫聞聲。即語婦人言。此是何聲。答言。不知何故作此聲耶。其丈夫言。此出家人修梵行欲心起不能自制拍陰聲耳。諸比丘尼聞已以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。從今已後。不聽拍陰。拍者。手拍若拘鉢拍若鍵鎡拍。以歇欲心者越比尼罪。是名手拍。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunī residence was separated from lay people by a wall. A lustful bhikkhunī patted her vagina with the hand. When the husband heard the sound, he said to his wife: “What’s this sound?” She answered: “You don’t know why one makes this sound?” Her husband said: “This is the sound of these renunciates who practise celibacy, have a lustful mind, can’t restrain themselves, and pat their vagina.” When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they for this reason went and informed … The Buddha asked: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to pat the vagina. ‘Patting’ means if she pats with the hand, or an earthen bowl, or a brass vessel to relieve a lustful mind, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on patting with the hand.




MgPn12


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼欲心起。作胡膠身生縛著。床脚後失火。恐燒床褥故出之。時俗人看火起。何處被燒何處不被燒。見已嫌訶。云何出家人作此惡事。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽作胡膠形。胡膠形者。若胡膠作若銅鉛錫白鑞若牙若蠟蜜。如是比作身生。以歇欲心者。偷蘭遮。是名胡膠形。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a lustful bhikkhunī made a dildo out of gum, and attached it to the foot of her bed. Later, a fire broke out. She feared that it’d burn her bed and mat, so she brought them outside. Then lay people saw the fire that had flared up, (and thought): “Which place has been burnt, which place hasn’t been burnt?” When they saw it, they criticized her: “Why do renunciates make this unwholesome thing?” The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to make a dildo out of gum. ‘A dildo out of gum’ means making it out of gum, copper, lead, tin, pewter, ivory, beeswax, etc. If she makes a dildo like this to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya.” This is called the rule on dildos out of gum.




MgPn13


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時大愛道往至佛所。頭面禮足却住一面。時大愛道白佛言。世尊女人形臭得聽洗不。佛言得洗。時比丘尼洗外內猶故臭。以是因緣往白。乃至言得洗內不。佛言得洗。洗法者得齊一指節。不得令過。若過洗以。歇欲心者偷蘭遮是名洗法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Mahāpajāpatī went to the Buddha, paid respect with her head at his feet, and stood at one side. Then Mahāpajāpatī said to the Buddha: “World-honored One, women’s genitals stink. May we be allowed to wash them?” The Buddha said: “You may wash them.” Then bhikkhunīs washed them outside, but the inside still stank. For this reason, she went and asked again. … She said: “May we wash inside?” The Buddha said: “You may wash. The method of washing is: One may to go in one finger joint. One may not go deeper. If (a bhikkhunī) washes deeper inside, to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya.” This is called the rule on washing.




MgPn14


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼有月期污床褥。大愛道往詣佛所白佛言。世尊。得作月期不淨衣不。佛言得。當持故布作。不得堅物作。又不得深內作婬欲想。當軟物障小便道。若用堅物深內。以歇欲心者。偷蘭遮。是名月期衣法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhunīs who had their menses soiled their beds and mats. Mahāpajāpatī went to the Buddha and said to him: “World-honored One, may we make a cloth for the impurity of the menses?” The Buddha said: “You may. You should use an old cloth to make it. You may not make it with a hard item. You may also not insert it deeply to create thoughts of sexual desire. It should be made with a soft item to block the vagina. If (a bhikkhunī) uses a hard item, or inserts it deeply, to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya.” This is called the rule on the menstrual cloth. 




MgPn15


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼往女人洗浴處浣月期衣。女人嫌言。是沙門尼污此水赤乃如是。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。從今日後。不聽女人洗浴處浣月期衣。若浣者越比尼罪。是名女人浣月期衣法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhunīs went to the women’s bathing place to wash their menstrual cloths. The women were upset and said: “These renunciates are staining the water red like this.” For this reason the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to wash a menstrual cloth at the women’s bathing place. If (a bhikkhunī) washes one, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on washing menstrual cloth at the women’s place.




MgPn16


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時世尊制戒。不聽女人洗處浣月期衣。便往男子洗處浣。乃至若比丘尼往男子洗處浣者越比尼罪。是名男子法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down the precept that it’s not allowed to wash a menstrual cloth at the women’s bathing place. So the bhikkhunīs went to the men’s bathing place to wash it. … “If a bhikkhunī goes to the men’s bathing place to wash one, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on the men’s place.




MgPn17


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時世尊制戒不聽男子洗浴處浣月期衣。時比丘尼到客浣衣處浣。乃至不聽客浣衣處浣月期衣。當取瓫餘瓦器中於屏處浣。浣時不得持水灑地。當著水瀆中無人見處。衣當曬令乾。後須時當用。若比丘尼。於客浣衣處浣月期衣者越比尼罪。是名客浣衣處。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down the precept that it’s not allowed to wash a menstrual cloth at the men’s bathing place. Then bhikkhunīs went to the place where guests wash their clothes to wash it. … “It’s not allowed to wash a menstrual cloth at the place where guests wash their clothes. One should put it into a tub or another clay utensil, and wash it in a secluded place. When washing it, she may not take the water, and pour it on the ground. She should take the water to a ditch, or a place where nobody can see it. The cloth should be put out in the sun to dry. Later when she needs it, she should use it. If a bhikkhunī washes a menstrual cloth at the place where guests wash their clothes, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on the guests’ clothes-washing place.




MgPn18


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼欲心起。以小便道承懸注水。即失不淨心生疑悔。諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道往白世尊。佛言。從今日後。不聽以小便道承懸注。懸注者水懸注下。若比丘尼於懸注水中浴時。當持衣物遮。若以小便道承懸注水屋簷漏水。以歇欲心者偷蘭遮。若於懸注水屋簷漏浴者。不得以身向水當背上。若以身向水以歇欲心者偷蘭遮。是名懸注水。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a lustful bhikkhunī flushed her vagina in a waterfall, and emitted sexual fluids. Then doubt and remorse arose in her mind. The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to flush the vagina in a waterfall. ‘A waterfall’ means water falling downwards. If a bhikkhunī bathes in a waterfall, she should hold a cloth item for protection. If she flushes her vagina in a waterfall, or with water falling from the roof of a building, to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya. If she washes in a waterfall, or with water falling from the roof of a building, she may not turn the body towards the water. It should fall on the back. If she turns the body towards the water to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya.” This is called the rule on waterfalls.




MgPn19


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼於急流水中浴。欲心生逆水而行失不淨。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至從今日後。不聽於急流水中逆水觸小便道。流水者。若山水若急流水。若向流逆水以歇欲心者偷蘭遮。若於急流水洗時。不得向流當背。若向流者越比尼罪。是名流水。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī bathed in rapidly flowing water. Lust arose in her mind, and she went against the current, and emitted sexual fluids. For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to go against the current in rapidly flowing water, and have it touch the vagina. ‘Flowing water’ means a mountain stream, or rapidly flowing water. If she turns towards the current, and goes against the water to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya. If she washes in rapidly flowing water, she may not turn towards the current. She should turn the back towards it. If she turns towards the current, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on flowing water.




MgPn20


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼種種觸身出精。或蕪菁根葱根。種種諸根內小便道中出精。比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至從今已後不聽若比丘尼用蕪菁根葱根內小便道中出精。以歇欲心者偷蘭遮。是名根。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī touched the body with all kinds of things, and emitted sexual fluids. She inserted turnip roots, scallion roots, and various other roots into her vagina and emitted sexual fluids. For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … “From now on, it’s no longer allowed. If a bhikkhunī takes turnip roots or scallion roots, inserts them into her vagina, and emits sexual fluids, to relieve a lustful mind, it’s a thullaccaya.” This is called the rule on roots.




Summary Verse


<beginchinese>拍陰胡膠形 齊節月期衣
女人洗處浣 男處浣亦然
客浣衣處浣 懸注及急流
種種根出精 第二跋渠竟<endchinese>

Patting the vagina, a dildo out of gum, going in one finger joint, a menstrual cloth,
Washing at the women’s bathing place, washing at the men’s place as well, 
Washing at the guest’s clothes-washing place, a waterfall, a rapid stream,
Emitting sexual fluids with various roots, the second chapter is finished.