MgVb_pj1

摩訶僧祇律卷第三十六
東晉天竺三藏佛陀跋陀羅共法顯譯
明八波羅夷法初
Mahāsaṅghika Vinaya, 36th fascicle.
Translated by the Indian Tipiṭaka master Buddhabhadra together with Fǎxiǎn during the Eastern Jin dynasty.
Beginning of the explanation of the eight pārājika rules.


Origin Story

婆伽婆三藐三佛陀。從本發意所修習者皆悉成就。住迦維羅衛釋氏精舍。為諸天世人恭敬供養。廣說如上。爾時大愛道瞿曇彌。與闡陀夷闡陀波羅陀婆闡陀闡陀母如是等五百釋女。往詣佛所頭面作禮却住一面。時大愛道白佛言。世尊。佛興難值得聞法難。今遭如來出世演說甘露妙法。令諸眾生成就寂滅妙證。如大愛道出家線經中廣說。乃至佛言。從今日後。大愛道比丘尼僧上座如是持。
The Blessed One, the fully awakened Buddha, in accordance with his original intentions, having practised and fully achieved them all, was staying in Kapilavatthu at the Sakyan monastery where he was venerated by and received offerings from gods and humans. As explained in detail above. At that time, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, with Chandajī, Chandapālā, Dāsacchandā, Chandamātā, and 500 Sakyan women went to the Buddha. Having arrived, they paid respect with their heads (at his feet), and stood at one side. Then Mahāpajāpatī said to the Buddha: “World-honored One, the arising of a Buddha is difficult to encounter, and it’s difficult to get to hear the dhamma. Now a Tathāgata has arisen in the world, who teaches the sweet nectar of the marvelous dhamma, and who causes beings to achieve extinguishment and the marvelous awakening.” As explained in detail in the sutta of Mahāpajāpatī’s going forth. … The Buddha said: “From now on, Mahāpajāpatī is the bhikkhunī sangha’s most senior nun. Remember it like this.” 
爾時大愛道瞿曇彌白佛言。世尊。以為諸比丘制四墮重法。我等得廣聞不。佛言得。瞿曇彌。若信心善女人欲得五事利益者。當盡受持此比尼。何等五。若信心善女人欲建立佛法者。當盡受持此比尼。欲令正法久住者。當盡受持此比尼。不欲有疑悔請問於他人者。當盡受持此比尼。諸有比丘尼犯罪恐怖為作依怙者。當盡受持此比尼。欲遊化諸方而無罣礙者。當盡受持此比尼。是名篤信善女人受持此比尼五事利益。餘如上比丘初五緣中廣說。
At that time, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī said to the Buddha: “World-honored One, for the bhikkhus you’ve laid down four grave rules of downfall. May we hear them in detail?” The Buddha said: “You may. Gotamī, if a faithful, good woman wants to obtain five beneficial things, she should completely accept and keep this vinaya. What five? If a faithful, good woman wants to become established in the Buddha-dhamma, she should completely accept and keep this vinaya. If she wants to make the true dhamma last long, she should completely accept and keep this vinaya. If she doesn’t want to have doubts and regrets and ask others about them, she should completely accept and keep this vinaya. If she wants to be someone other bhikkhunīs can rely on when they fear that they have committed an offense, she should completely accept and keep this vinaya. If she wants to wander and teach in all directions without impediments, she should completely accept and keep this vinaya. This is called a devoted, good woman who accepts and keeps this vinaya for five beneficial things. The rest is as explained in detail above in the first five passages of the bhikkhu rules.


Final Ruling

若比丘尼不還戒戒羸不出。受婬法乃至共畜生。是比丘尼犯波羅夷。不應共住。
If a bhikkhunī, who hasn’t returned the precepts, who hasn’t disclosed her weakness in the precepts, accepts sexual intercourse, even with an animal, that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.”<note: This rule is phrased differently in the pātimokkha.>


Explanation

比丘尼者。受具足善受具足。一白三羯磨無遮法。和合二部眾。如法非不如法。和合非不和合。滿二十非不滿二十。是名比丘尼不還戒戒羸不出者。如上比丘中廣說。受者欲心受。婬者非梵行。若比丘尼與人男眠覺死。如是非人男畜生男眠覺死。人非人畜生不能男眠覺死。三瘡門。若口若小行道大行道。若一一受樂者。是比丘尼波羅夷不應共住。波羅夷者。謂於法智退沒墮落無道果分。是名波羅夷。如是乃至盡智無生智。於彼諸智退沒墮落無道果分。是名波羅夷。又復波羅夷者。於涅槃退沒墮落無道果分。是名波羅夷。又復波羅夷者。於梵行退沒墮落。是名波羅夷波羅夷者所可犯罪。不可發露悔過。故名波羅夷。
“A bhikkhunī” means someone who has received the full ordination, has well-received the full ordination, with one motion and three announcements, without obstructive states, by both sanghas in harmony, in accordance with dhamma, not against the dhamma, in harmony, not without harmony, fully 20 (years old), not less than 20. This is called a bhikkhunī. “Not returned the precepts, not disclosed her weakness in the precepts” are as explained in detail above in the bhikkhu rules. “Accepting?” means accepting with a lustful mind. “Sexual intercourse” means not observing celibacy. If a bhikkhunī feels pleasure from any of the following: with a man, asleep, awake, or dead, or with a non-human male, or a male animal, asleep, awake, or dead, or with an impotant male human, non-human, or animal, asleep, awake, or dead, through the three orifices, the mouth, the vagina, and the anus, that bhikkhunī is pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community. “A pārājika” means she has fallen away and departed from dhamma knowledge, and she has no share in the path and fruits. This is called pārājika. Likewise, … she has fallen away and departed from the knowledges, such as the knowledge of cessation and the knowledge of no (re)birth, and she has no share in the path and fruits. This is called pārājika. Moreover, “a pārājika” means that she has fallen away and departed from extinguishment, and she has no share in the path and fruits. This is called pārājika. Moreover, “a pārājika” means she has fallen away and departed from the monastic life. This is called pārājika. “A pārājika” means that the offense that has been committed can’t be disclosed and confessed. Therefore, it’s called pārājika.
若比丘尼染污心欲看男子。越比尼心悔。若眼見若聞聲。越比尼罪。裸身相向偷蘭罪。乃至入如胡麻波羅夷。若比丘尼不說還戒不說不還戒。戒羸便作俗人。隨其所犯得。罪若作外道亦如是。若裹不覆若覆不裹。亦覆亦裹不覆不裹。乃至入如胡麻。皆波羅夷。若比丘尼不還戒戒羸不出。便作俗人形服而犯者。隨其犯得罪。若比丘尼於比丘邊強行婬者。比丘尼波羅夷。比丘受樂者亦波羅夷。
If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind wants to see a man, she transgresses against vinaya and should mentally repent. If she sees him or hears him, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If they turn their naked bodies towards each other, it’s a thullaccaya. … If he penetrates her even like a sesame seed, she’s pārājika. If a bhikkhunī without saying that she returns the precepts, and without saying that she doesn’t return the precepts, with weak precepts, just becomes a lay person, she incurs the offense according to what she has committed. If she becomes a non-Buddhist renunciate, it’s the same. If they wrap but don’t cover, or cover but don’t wrap, or both cover and wrap, or neither cover nor wrap, and he penetrates her even like a sesame seed, she’s pārājika in all cases. <note: A. Hirakawa suggests that this refers to birth control methods. “Covering” is a method used by women, “Wrapping” a method used by men.> If a bhikkhunī, who hasn’t returned the precepts, who hasn’t disclosed her weakness in the precepts, just looks and dresses like a lay person and commits the act, she incurs the offense according to what she has committed. If a bhikkhunī close to a bhikkhu forces him to engage in sexual intercourse, the bhikkhunī is pārājika. If the bhikkhu feels pleasure, he also is pārājika. 
若比丘比丘尼共行婬者。俱波羅夷。比丘尼共沙彌行婬者。比丘尼波羅夷。沙彌驅出。俗人亦如是。若比丘尼共三種行婬。人非人畜生。復有三種上中下道。復有三種若覺若眠若死皆波羅夷。
比丘尼若眠心狂入定。有人就上行婬。比丘尼覺。若初中後受樂者波羅夷。
比丘尼若眠心狂入定。人就上行婬。覺已初不受樂。中後受樂者亦波羅夷。
比丘尼若眠心狂入定。人就上行婬。覺已初中不受樂。後受樂者亦波羅夷。
比丘尼若眠心狂若入定。人就上行婬。覺已初中後不受樂無罪。
If a bhikkhu and a bhikkhunī have sexual intercourse together, both are pārājika. If a bhikkhunī has sexual intercourse with a sāmaṇera, the bhikkhunī is pārājika, and the sāmaṇera is expelled. With lay people it’s also the same. If a bhikkhunī has sex of the three kinds, with humans, non-humans, or animals; or the three other kinds, the top orifice, the middle orifice, or the low orifice; or the three other kinds, with someone who is awake, asleep, or dead, she’s pārājika in all cases. 
If a bhikkhunī is asleep, mentally confused, or has entered concentration, and someone just gets on top of her and engages in sexual intercourse, if the bhikkhunī, when she wakes up, feels pleasure in the beginning, middle, or end, she’s pārājika. 
If a bhikkhunī is asleep, mentally confused, or has entered concentration, and someone just gets on top of her and engages in sexual intercourse, if she, when she wakes up, doesn’t feel pleasure in the beginning, but feels pleasure in the middle or end, she’s also pārājika. 
If a bhikkhunī is asleep, mentally confused, or has entered concentration, and someone just gets on top of her and engages in sexual intercourse, if she, when she wakes up, doesn’t feel pleasure in the beginning and middle, but feels pleasure in the end, she’s also pārājika. 
If a bhikkhunī is asleep, mentally confused, or has entered concentration, and someone just gets on top of her and engages in sexual intercourse, if she, when she wakes up, doesn’t feel pleasure in the beginning, middle, or end, there is no offense. 
云何受樂。云何不受樂。受樂者。譬如人飢得種種美食彼以食為樂。又如渴人得種種好飲彼以飲為樂。受欲樂者亦復如是。不受樂者。譬如好淨之人以種種死屍繫其頸。又如破癰熱鐵烙身。不受樂者亦復如是。若比丘尼受婬。若買得若雇得。若恩義得若知識得。調戲得試弄得未更事得。如是一切得而受婬者。皆波羅夷。若心狂不覺者無罪。是故說。若比丘尼不還戒戒羸不出。受婬法乃至共畜生。是比丘尼犯波羅夷不應共住。
What is “feeling pleasure,” what is “not feeling pleasure”? “Feeling pleasure” means for example if a hungry person obtains all kinds of delicious food, they’re pleased by the food. Or again, if a thirsty person obtains all kinds of good drinks, they’re pleased by the drinks. Feeling pleasure is also like this. “Not feeling pleasure” means for example if a very clean person has all kinds of corpses tied around their neck, or again, if an abscess is opened, or a hot iron burns one’s body. “Not feeling pleasure” is also like this. If a bhikkhunī accepts sexual intercourse, whether she buys it, or hires someone, or obtains it through kindness, or from a friend, or through harrassment, or through seduction, or through other means, if she obtains it through any of these ways, and accepts sexual intercourse, she’s pārājika in all cases. If she’s mentally confused or not aware, there is no offense. This is what was said.
If a bhikkhunī, who hasn’t returned the precepts, who hasn’t disclosed her weakness in the precepts, accepts sexual intercourse, even together with an animal, that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.