MgVb_pc94




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時世尊制戒。滿十二雨十法具足得畜弟子。爾時比丘尼滿十二雨十法具足畜弟子。諸比丘尼嫌言。汝滿十二雨十法具足。誰能知汝。
諸比丘尼聞已語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。乃至答言。實爾世尊。佛言。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down the precept that someone who has 12 full rains and fulfills the 10 requirements may take on a student. Then a bhikkhunī who had 12 full rains and fulfilled the 10 requirements took on a student. The bhikkhunīs were upset and said: “That you’ve 12 full rains and fulfill the 10 requirements, who can know that?”
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. … She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha said: 




Preliminary Ruling


<beginchinese>從今日後。畜弟子應作求聽羯磨。然後得乞畜弟子羯磨。<endchinese>

From now on, to take on a student, a formal act to request permission should be carried out. After that, one should ask for the formal act to take-on-students.




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>羯磨者應作是說。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲比丘尼成就十法。若僧時到。僧某甲比丘尼。欲從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲比丘尼十法成就。欲從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。
此比丘尼應從僧乞。胡跪合掌作是言。阿梨耶僧聽。我某甲滿十二雨十法成就。今從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。唯願僧與我畜弟子羯磨。如是三乞。
羯磨者應作是說。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲比丘尼滿十二雨十法成就。已從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。若僧時到。僧某甲比丘尼十法成就。與畜弟子羯磨。如是白。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲比丘尼滿十二雨十法成就。已從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。僧今與某甲比丘尼畜弟子羯磨。阿梨耶僧忍。與某甲比丘尼畜弟子羯磨。忍者僧默然。若不忍者便說。是初羯磨。第二第三亦如是說。僧已與某甲比丘尼畜弟子羯磨竟。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

The master of ceremony should say: “May the noble sangha listen. Bhikkhunī So-and-so fulfills the 10 requirements. If the right time has come for the sangha, the bhikkhunī So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the formal act to take-on-students. May the noble sangha listen. Bhikkhunī So-and-so fulfills the 10 requirements and wants to ask the sangha for the formal act to take-on-students. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” 
That bhikkhunī should then ask the sangha, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the noble sangha listen. I, So-and-so, have 12 full rains and fulfill the 10 requirements. Now I ask the sangha for the formal act to take-on-students. May the sangha do the formal act to take-on-students for me.” Like this three requests. 
The master of ceremony should then say: “May the noble sangha listen. Bhikkhunī So-and-so has 12 full rains and fulfills the 10 requirements. She has asked the sangha for the formal act to take-on-students. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha do the formal act to take-on-students for bhikkhunī So-and-so, who fulfills the 10 requirements. This is the motion. May the noble sangha listen. Bhikkhunī So-and-so has 12 full rains and fulfills the 10 requirements. She has asked the sangha for the formal act to take-on-students. The sangha now does the formal act to take-on-students for bhikkhunī So-and-so. The noble sangha accepts to do the formal act to take-on-students for bhikkhunī So-and-so. If you accept this, the sangha should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” A second and third time are recited in the same way. “The sangha has done the formal act to take-on-students for bhikkhunī So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”




Origin Story (continued)


<beginchinese>佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼十法具足。不羯磨而畜弟子者波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī who fulfills the 10 requirements takes on a student without a formal act, it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。十法具足者亦如上說。不羯磨者不僧中作羯磨。名不羯磨。十法不具足者亦名不羯磨。雖作羯磨。若白不成就。眾不成就羯磨不成就。亦名不羯磨。畜弟子者受具足不羯磨與受具足者波夜提。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Fulfilling the 10 requirements” is as explained above. “Without a formal act” means without carrying out the formal act in the midst of the sangha. This is called “without a formal act”. If she doesn’t fulfill the 10 requirements, it’s also called “without a formal act,” even if she carried out the formal act. If the motion isn’t complete, or if the assembly isn’t complete, or if the announcements are not complete, all these are called “without a formal act”. “Taking on students” means giving the full ordination. Giving the full ordination without a formal act is a pācittiya. This is what the World-honored One said.