MgVb_pc116




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時竭住母比丘尼。先不語卒爾而入竭住父比丘房。而摩其背。即反顧視之。見已言。咄咄遠我。比丘尼言。我先常與洗浴。今摩觸何苦。語言。本是俗人今日出家不得如先。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。乃至汝云何先不白入比丘精舍。從今已後不聽。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunī Gartodara’s mother just entered the room of the bhikkhu Gartodara’s father without announcing herself first, and rubbed his back. He turned around to investigate and seeing her, he said: “Hey! Get away from me!” The bhikkhunī said: “Formerly I often gave you a bath. Now I’m just rubbing you, where’s the problem?” He said: “Back then we were lay people, now we have gone forth, and may not act as before.”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. … Why did you enter a bhikkhu residence without informing them first? From now on, it’s no longer allowed.” … “Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼先不白入比丘僧伽藍者波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī enters a bhikkhu monastery without informing them first, it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。比丘僧伽藍者下至一比丘住處。先不白者先不語不呼。入者如竭住母比丘尼波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼欲入比丘住處者。當到門屋應先白和南比丘尼。白入願聽。比丘當籌量。若比丘尼賢善。自無事著衣服者聽入。若有事或泥作或裸露當語言。姊妹小住。應唱言。諸長老。比丘尼欲入各自著衣。若比丘尼不善無威儀者。應語莫入有事。若先不語最初入者波夜提。後來者無罪。不白而入者舉一足越毘尼罪。兩足波夜提。若還去者越毘尼罪。若比丘先不語而入比丘尼住處者越毘尼罪。應住門屋下遣淨人女語。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “A bhikkhu monastery” means even just a single bhikkhu’s residence. “Without informing them first” means without speaking or calling first. “Entering” means like the bhikkhunī Gartodara’s mother; this is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī wants to enter a bhikkhu’s residence, she should go to the door of the building, and should first say: “Venerables, a bhikkhunī informs you that she requests permission to enter.” The bhikkhus should then assess whether that bhikkhunī is a wise and virtuous person, and whether they themselves are not dealing with an issue, and are all properly dressed. Then she should be allowed to enter. If they’re dealing with an issue, or somebody is working with mud, or is naked, they should say: “Sister, wait a little.” They should call out: “Venerables, a bhikkhunī wants to enter. May everyone put on their clothes.” If a bhikkhunī isn’t virtuous and without proper conduct, they should say: “Don’t enter, we’re dealing with an issue.” If a first bhikkhunī enters without informing them first, it’s a pācittiya. For the ones following her, there is no offense. If while entering without informing them she lifts one foot, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. When she has lifted both feet, it’s a pācittiya. If she turns back and leaves, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If a bhikkhu enters a bhikkhunī’s residence without speaking first, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. He should wait at the door of the building, and send a female attendant to inform them. This is what the World-honored One said.
