MgVb_pc112




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住毘舍離。爾時跋陀羅伽比梨比丘尼持傘蓋著革屣。往親里家。為世人所嫌。云何沙門尼似如俗人如是多欲。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Vesāli. At that time, Bhaddā Kāpilānī bhikkhunī went to her relatives’ house holding an umbrella, and wearing leather sandals. The lay people were upset: “Why does this renunciate look like a lay person, and has many such wishes?”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said:




Preliminary Ruling


<beginchinese>從今已後。不聽持傘蓋革屣。<endchinese>

“From now on, it’s no longer allowed to hold an umbrella, and (wear) leather sandals.” 




Second Origin Story


<beginchinese>復次佛住舍衛城。釋種女摩羅女先是樂人。出家道路行。時天極熱甚大疲苦。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事。往白世尊。佛言。從今日後聽病時。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

At another time, the Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. Women from the Sakyan and Mallan clans who originally came from wealthy families went forth to practise the path. Then the weather was extremely hot, and caused them great weariness and discomfort.
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed when one is sick.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼不病。持傘蓋著革屣者波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī who isn’t sick holds an umbrella, and wears leather sandals, it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。病者老羸病尫弱。世尊說無罪。傘蓋者樹皮蓋。多梨蓋。竹蓋。摩樓蓋。樹葉蓋。［疊＊毛］傘蓋。如是比餘蓋等。革屣者一重兩重。持者受用波夜提。波夜提者如上說。持蓋不持革屣越毘尼罪。持革屣不持傘蓋。亦越毘尼罪。二俱持者波夜提。二俱不持者無罪。若比丘持莊嚴傘蓋兩重革屣者越毘尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Sick” means old, weak, sick, disabled, or feeble. In these cases, the World-honored One said that there is no offense. “An umbrella” means a tree-bark umbrella, a palm-leaf umbrella,<note: tāla> a bamboo umbrella, a reed grass umbrella,<note:muñja> a tree-leaf umbrella, a cotton cloth umbrella, and any other similar umbrella. “Leather sandals” means single-layered and double-layered. “Holding” means using; this is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If she holds an umbrella, but doesn’t wear leather sandals, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she wears leather sandals, but doesn’t hold an umbrella, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she holds and wears both items, it’s a pācittiya. If she doesn’t hold or wear both items, there is no offense. If a bhikkhu holds a decorated umbrella, and wears double-layered leather sandals, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.