MgVb_pc125




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼諍鬪不和合住。時大愛道瞿曇彌眾主。僧諍事已起者不能滅。未起者不能令不起。
諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。呼大愛道瞿曇彌來。來已佛語瞿曇彌。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。汝云何諍事起而不斷滅。未起者不能方便令不起。從今日後。諍事起當斷滅。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhunīs were quarreling and didn’t live in harmony. Then Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī was the group’s leader. She couldn’t put and end to the conflicts that had arisen in the sangha. And the conflicts that hadn’t yet arisen, she couldn’t prevent from arising.
For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and spoke with the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī.” When she came, he asked her: “Gotamī, did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “Why did you not settle an arisen conflict? And why were you not able to find a skillful means to prevent conflicts that hadn’t yet arisen from arising? From now on, arisen conflicts should be settled.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼鬪諍不和合住。眾主不料理斷滅者波夜提。</lzh>

If bhikkhunīs are quarreling and don’t live in harmony, and the group’s leader doesn’t take action to settle it, it’s a pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。諍者口諍。鬪者展轉取勝不和合住。是法非法。是毘尼非毘尼。是罪非罪。是輕是重。是可治是不可治。有殘無殘。如法羯磨非法羯磨。和合羯磨不和合羯磨。應羯磨不應羯磨。是處羯磨非處羯磨。眾主者眾之標望得自從意。不料理斷滅者不自滅不使人滅波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼鬪諍不和合住。不得視置。當料理斷滅使展轉悔過。若復不止事。須羯磨者當集僧料理。若自不能者。當餘眾請有德比丘尼。若比丘。若優婆塞優婆夷令滅。若諍事難斷當作是念。眾生業行待時待熟自當滅。如是者無罪。若比丘鬪諍。眾主不料理滅者越毘尼。罪是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Fighting” means verbally fighting. “Quarreling” means trying to get the upper hand over each other, not living in harmony: “This is dhamma, this isn’t dhamma; this is vinaya, this isn’t vinaya; this is an offense, this isn’t an offense; this is light, this is heavy; this is corrigible, this is non-corrigible; this has a remainder, this has no remainder; this is a formal act in accordance with dhamma, this is a formal act not in accordance with dhamma; this is a formal act in harmony, this isn’t a formal act in harmony; this formal act should be done, this formal act shouldn’t be done; this is a formal act in an appropriate location, this is a formal act in an inappropriate location.” “The group’s leader” means someone whom the group looks up to, and who is able to make their own judgements. “Not taking action to settle it” means not ending it oneself, and not have people end it. This is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If bhikkhunīs quarrel and don’t live in harmony, one may not disregard it. One should take action to settle it, and have them confess their transgressions to each other. If the’ssue still doesn’t stop, the master of ceremony should gather the sangha to take action. If they aren’t able to do it by themselves, they should ask other groups who have virtuous bhikkhunīs, or a bhikkhu, or lay Buddhists to end it. If the conflict is difficult to end, one should think: “In the group, a kammic result has arisen. If I wait a while for the ripening, it’ll end by itself.” If she acts like this, there’s no offense. If bhikkhus are quarreling, and the group’s leader doesn’t take action to end it, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.