MgVb_pj5


<beginchinese>佛住迦維羅衛國尼拘類樹釋氏精舍。爾時世尊制戒不聽比丘尼阿練若處住。時賴吒比丘尼聚落中未有精舍。寄釋種家住。授釋種年少經。賴吒比丘尼身色端正而未離欲。年少亦復端正俱未離欲。一日之中三來受經。時比丘尼數數見已欲心耽著。遂至成病顏色萎黃。諸比丘尼問訊言。阿梨耶何所患苦。須何等藥。若須酥油蜜石蜜當相給與。答言不須。自當差耳。優婆塞優婆夷問訊亦如是。時釋種年少問言。阿梨耶何所患苦。須何等藥。當相給與。家中有者與。若無者當餘處求索與。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Kapilavatthu in the Sakyan Banyan Tree monastery. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down the precept that it’s not allowed for bhikkhunīs to live in the wilderness. Then Rāṣṭrā bhikkhunī didn’t have a monastery in the village yet. She was staying with a Sakyan family, and teaching a young Sakyan man the suttas. Rāṣṭrā bhikkhunī’s body was graceful and she was not yet free from desire. The youth was also graceful, and not yet free from desire. Every day, he came three times to learn about the suttas. Then when the bhikkhunī had seen him so often, desire obsessed her mind. Eventually, she became sick, and her complexion turned yellow. The bhikkhunīs inquired: “Venerable, from what do you suffer? Which medicines do you need? If you need ghee, oil, honey, or sugar, we’ll provide it for you.” She answered: “I don’t need anything. I’ll recover on my own.” The male and female lay Buddhists inquired the same. Then the young Sakyan man asked her: “Venerable, from what do you suffer? Which medicines do you need? I’ll provide it for you. What we have in the house, I’ll give. If we don’t have it, I’ll request it from other places and give it.”


<beginchinese>答言長壽。非如是等藥能差。復問。阿梨耶。是病非是身病故。當知心病耳。答言。如汝所說。復問。此病云何當差。比丘尼言。汝欲使我差不。答言欲使差。又復語言。當須何物今求相與。比丘尼言。共作是事來。年少答言不敢。餘出家人被袈裟者。我尚不生此心。而況是師我所尊重。復言。若不能者。但抱我嗚。捉我上下捫摸我。答言但須爾者我能為之。即便抱嗚捻捉兩乳上下摩捫。得適意已後數數如是。如世尊說。念色不忘染污心起。如女人憶男男憶女人。從是已後數數。不止。餘比丘尼語言。阿梨耶莫作是事。此不得爾答言。我作此事便得悅樂。<endchinese>

She answered: “Long-lived One, there are no medicines that can cure me.” He asked again: “Venerable, this sickness is then not because of a bodily ailment? I take it it’s a mental illness?” She answered: “It’s as you said.” He asked again: “How will you recover from this sickness?” The bhikkhunī said: “Do you want to cure me?” He answered: “I want to cure you.” And he asked again: “Whatever you need I’ll seek for it now and give it to you.” The bhikkhunī said: “Come and do ‘the act’ with me.” The young man answered: “I don’t dare to do that. Even towards other renunciates who wear monastic robes, I don’t give rise to such mindstates. How much less then towards the teacher whom I respect so much?” She said again: “If you can’t do it, then just hug me, kiss me, hold me, and stroke me up and down.” He answered: “If you just need that, I can do that.” He then hugged her, kissed her, squeezed her two breasts, and stroked her up and down. When they had obtained enjoyment, they afterwards often did it again. As the World-honored One said: “When we think about the body, don’t forget that a defiled mind arises, such as a woman’s thoughts about men, or a man’s thoughts about women.” From then on, they did it again and again without stopping. The other bhikkhuns said: “Venerable, don’t do this. It’s not allowable.” She answered: “When I do it, I feel pleasure.”


<beginchinese>比丘尼即以此事語大愛道。大愛道聞已往白世尊。佛言。呼賴吒比丘尼來。來已問言汝實漏心。漏心男子邊肩以下膝以上摩觸受樂耶。答言。實爾世尊。佛言。賴吒。此是惡事。汝常不聞我無量方便呵責婬欲。欲為迷醉。欲如大火燒人善根。欲為大患。我常種種方便稱讚離欲斷欲度欲。汝今云何能作此惡事。此非法非律。不可以是長養善法。佛語大愛道瞿曇彌。依止迦維羅衛住比丘尼皆悉令集。集已爾時世尊以是因緣。向諸比丘尼廣說過患事起。種種因緣呵責過患事起已。為諸比丘尼隨順說法。有十事利益。如來應供正遍知。為諸弟子制戒立說波羅提木叉法。何等十。<endchinese>

The bhikkhunīs then told Mahāpajāpatī about this matter. When she had heard it, she went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon Rāṣṭrā bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really with a defiled mind, feel pleasure from being rubbed and touched below the shoulders and above the knees by a man with a defiled mind?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha said: “Rāṣṭrā, this is an unwholesome thing. Have you not often heard me with countless skillful means criticize sexual desire. Desire intoxicates you. Desire is like a great fire that burns people’s wholesome roots. Desire causes great suffering. I’ve often with countless skillful means praised abandoning desire, eliminating desire, and crossing over desire. How could you now do this unwholesome thing? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Kapilavatthu.” When they had gathered, the World-honored One for this reason explained to the bhikkhunīs in detail the transgression that had arisen. When he had criticized this arisen transgression with all kinds of reasons, he taught the dhamma to the bhikkhunīs accordingly: “There are 10 benefits for which the Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and of complete knowledge, lays down precepts for his disciples, and establishes the recitation of the pātimokkha rules. Which 10?


<beginchinese>一者攝僧故。二者極攝僧故。三令僧安樂故。四折伏無羞人故。五有慚愧人得安隱住故。六不信者令得信故。七已信者增益信故。八於現法中得漏盡故。九未生諸漏令不生故。十正法得久住故。為諸天世人開甘露門故。是為十。以是十事。如來應供正遍知為諸弟子制戒立說波羅提木叉法。乃至未聞者當聞。已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

1) To hold the sangha together; 2) to hold the sangha together well; 3) for the comfort of the sangha; 4) to subdue shameless persons; 5) to let conscientious persons live in peace; 6) so that faithless persons may acquire faith; 7) so that faithful persons grow in faith; 8) to attain the exhaustion of the taints in this present life; 9) so that not yet arisen taints won’t arise; 10) so that the true dhamma may last long, that the doors to the sweet nectar<beginnote>“Sweet nectar” is probably a rendering of amṛta / amata, which has two meanings: ambrosia, the drink of the gods; and the deathless. The ancient Chinese translators chose to go with the first meaning. Pāli parallels of this expression are usually translated as “the doors to the deathless”.<endnote> are opened for gods and humans. These are the 10. For these 10 benefits, the Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and of complete knowledge, lays down precepts for his disciples, and establishes the recitation of the pātimokkha rules. … Those who haven’t yet heard them should listen. Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<beginh2>Final Ruling<endh2>


<beginchinese>若比丘尼漏心。漏心男子邊肩以下膝以上摩觸受樂者。是比丘尼波羅夷不應共住。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind, feels pleasure from being rubbed and touched below the shoulders and above the knees by a man with a defiled mind, that bhikkhunī is pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.”




<beginh2>Explanation<endh2>


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。漏心男子者。欲心。肩以下者。乳房以下。膝以上者。大髀上至臍。摩觸者。移手摩捫。受樂者。覺快樂。染著者。是比丘尼波羅夷波羅夷者如上說。不共住者。不得共比丘尼住。法食味食。如前後亦如是。如後前亦如是。波羅夷罪不應共住。若比丘尼漏心。漏心男子肩以下膝以上摩觸受樂者波羅夷。不應共住。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “A man with a defiled mind” means a lustful mind. “Below the shoulders” means below the breasts. “Above the knees” means from the thighs up to the navel. “Rubbing and touching” means moving the hands to stroke. “Feeling pleasure” means to attain happiness and defiled attachment. This bhikkhunī is pārājika. “A pārājika” is as explained above. “Not living in community” means she may not stay with the bhikkhunīs, and may not take dhamma nourishment or material nourishment. As before so also afterwards, as afterwards so also before, she’s pārājika, and may not live in community. If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind, close to a man with a defiled mind, feels pleasure from being rubbed and touched below the shoulders and above the knees, she’s pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.


<beginchinese>如是不能男及女人偷蘭遮罪。比丘尼漏心男子不漏心。亦波羅夷。不能男及女人偷蘭遮罪。比丘尼無漏心男子有漏心。偷蘭遮。不能男及女人越比尼罪。比丘尼無漏心男子無漏心。越比尼罪不能男子女人。越比尼心悔。若比丘尼使男子剃髮時。兩女人痛。按令覺女人不覺男子。如是刺頭出血刺臂刺脚時。當使女人急捉。令覺女人不覺男子。肩以上膝以下若有癰瘡。使女人捉男子破無罪。隱處不得。隱處者。肩以下膝以上。若是處有病者。當使女人治。是故說。<endchinese>

If she does this with an impotent man or a woman, it’s a thullaccaya offense. If the bhikkhunī has a defiled mind and the man has an undefiled mind, it’s also a pārājika. If it’s an impotent man or a woman, it’s a thullaccaya offense. If the bhikkhunī has an undefiled mind and the man has a defiled mind, it’s a thullaccaya. If it’s an impotent man or a woman, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If the bhikkhunī has an undefiled mind and the man also has an undefiled mind, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If it’s an impotent man or a woman, she transgresses against vinaya and should mentally repent. If a woman has a man shave her hair, two women must pinch her to make her feel the women’s touch, not the man’s. In the same way, if he cuts her head and it bleeds, if he cuts her shoulder, or if he cuts her foot, she should have women grasp her harshly to make her feel the women’s touch, not the man’s. If she has an abscess above the shoulders or below the knees, and if she has women hold her while a man opens it, there is no offense. In the hidden place, this isn’t allowed. “The hidden place” means below the shoulders and above the knees. If there is a sickness in this place, she should have a woman treat it. This is what was said.