MgVb_np29




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時有載薪人駕車於店肆前過。商人問言。此賣索幾許。答言。一羯利沙槃。商人語言。汝載此薪詣我家寫之。還過此當與汝價。賣薪人即乘車經比丘尼精舍前過時。偷蘭難陀比丘尼問言。長壽。汝薪有主買未。答言已有得幾。答言一羯利沙槃。即語言我與汝兩羯利沙槃主貪利故即以與之。其人下薪已還經店肆前過。商人語言。汝持直去。答言。我已賣與餘人。問言。賣得幾許。答言。得兩羯利沙槃。問言誰取。答言。偷蘭難陀比丘尼。商人嫌呵言。此沙門尼何能饒錢如是。
比丘尼聞已語大愛道。大愛道即以此事往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實知他買已而益價取耶。答言實爾佛言。此是惡事。汝云何知他市得而抄買耶。此非法非律非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a vendor of firewood, who rode in his horse carriage past a shop. The merchant asked him: “For how much do you sell this (wood)?” He answered: “One kārṣāpaṇa.” The merchant said: “Deliver this firewood to my house and offload it there. When you return here, I’ll give you the money.” Then when the seller of the wood drove his chariot past the bhikkhunī monastery, Thullanandā bhikkhunī asked him: “Long-lived One, do you have a buyer for this wood yet?” He answered: “I already have.” “How much did you get?” He answered: “One kārṣāpaṇa.” Then she said: “I give you two kārṣāpaṇas.” Because the vendor wanted to make profit, he then gave it to her. When he had offloaded the wood, he returned and passed by the shop. The merchant said: “Come and get your money.” He answered: “I’ve sold it to someone else.” (The merchant) asked: “For how much did you sell it?” (The firewood vendor) answered: “I received two kārṣāpaṇas.” (The merchant) asked: “Who took it?” (The firewood vendor) answered: “Thullanandā bhikkhunī.” The merchant was upset, and criticised her: “How can this renunciate waste money like this?”
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really, when you knew that someone else had already bought something, take it for a higher price?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you, knowing that someone else had bought something, snatch and buy it? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼知他市得而抄買者尼薩耆波夜提。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī knows that someone has bought something, but snatches and buys it, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。知者若自知若從他聞。市得者如店上商人。若比丘尼欲市物。知他已市不得橫抄。應待前人不取得取。亦應問前人。汝故取不。若言故欲取。為欲堅之。此不應取。若言不復取。取者無罪。若比丘尼買衣鉢還自相抄者越比尼罪。若僧中上價取者。除和上阿闍梨無罪。若比丘市物抄截他市者越比尼罪。是故說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Knowing” means she either knows herself or hears it from others. “Has bought” means like the merchant in the shop. If a bhikkhunī wants to buy an item, and knows that someone else has already bought it, it’s not allowed to snatch it as she pleases. She should wait, and if the first person doesn’t take it, she may take it. She should also ask the first person: “Do you have the intention to take it?” If they say: “I’ve the intention and the wish to take it,” they’re determined on this, and she may not take it. If they say: “I won’t take it after all,” and she takes it, there’s no offense. If bhikkhunīs buy a robe or a bowl and snatch it from each other, they break a minor vinaya rule. If within the sangha she raises the price to take it, there’s no offense, unless it’s from her preceptor or teacher. If a bhikkhu buys and item and snatches and intercepts it from other buyers, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what was said.