MgVb_pc96




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼度十歲十二歲童女出家與受具足。時女軟弱不堪苦事。淨不具足。威儀不具足。不知奉事和上尼阿闍梨尼。不知入聚落。不知阿練若。不知入眾。不知著衣持鉢。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道乃至佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽不滿二十童女與受具足。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī gave the going forth and the full ordination to 10 and 12 year old girls. Then, these girls were weak, and couldn’t endure difficult situations. They didn’t fulfill purity, they didn’t conduct themselves properly, they didn’t know how to behave respectfully towards their preceptor and teachers. They didn’t know how to enter the village and the wilderness. They didn’t know how to be with the sangha, they didn’t know how to wear the robes and hold the bowl.
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, … The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to give the full ordination to girls below 20.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼與減二十雨童女受具足者波夜提。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī gives the full ordination to a girl who is less than 20 rains (i.e. years) old, it’s a pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。減二十雨者減二十年。是名減二十雨。童女減二十雨滿二十年。亦名減二十雨。童女減二十雨出二十年。亦名減二十雨。冬時生通數冬二十未經自恣。是名減二十雨。童女春時生亦爾。前安居時生數前安居二十未經自恣。後安居時生數後安居二十未經自恣。是亦名減二十雨。童女若減二十雨。童女一切作減二十想與受具足。一切波夜提罪。此人不名受具足。若減二十雨。半減想半滿想。與受具足。減想者波夜提。滿想者無罪。此人名受具足。減二十雨童女。一切滿想與受具足。一切無罪。是人名受具足。
滿二十雨減二十年。是名滿二十雨。童女滿二十雨滿二十年。滿二十雨過二十年。是名滿二十雨。童女冬時生經安居自恣已滿二十與受具足。春時亦如是。前安居生經前安居竟自恣已。後安居生後安居竟自恣已。滿二十雨童女。半減想半滿想。減想者越比尼罪。滿想者無罪。此人名受具足。滿二十雨童女。一切謂不滿想與受具足。一切越比尼罪。此人不名受具足。一切滿想一切無罪。此人名善受具足。
童女者未壞梵行與受具足者波夜提。若童女欲於如來法中受具足者。應問汝何時生。若不知者應看生年板。若無者當問父母親里若復不知當問何王時大豐時大儉時。若復不知者不可相形。若是樂人家女。年小而形大。當相其手足骨節。是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Less than 20 rains” means less than 20 years. This is called “less than 20 rains.” If a girl has less than 20 rains but has 20 calendar years, it’s still called “less than 20 rains”. If a girl was born in winter, and has 20 full winters, but hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony, it’s still called “less than 20 rains”. If a girl was born in spring, it’s the same. If a girl was born during the first rains retreat, and has 20 full first rains, but hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony, or if a girl was born during the second rains retreat, and has 20 full second rains, but hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony, it’s still called “less than 20 rains”. If a girl has less than 20 rains, and everybody thinks that that girl is below 20 and they still give her the full ordination, they all commit pācittiya offenses. That girl isn’t called fully ordained. If she has less than 20 rains, and half of the people think that she’s below 20, and the other half think that she’s 20, and they give her the full ordination, the ones who think that she’s below commit pācittiyas. Those who think she’s 20 incur no offense. That person is called fully ordained. If the girl has less than 20 rains, but everybody thinks that she’s 20, and they give her the full ordination, they all incur no offense. That person is called fully ordained.
If a girl has 20 rains, but has less than 20 years, it’s called “20 rains”. If a girl has 20 rains and 20 full years, or has 20 rains and more than 20 years, it’s called “20 rains”. If a girl was born in winter, and been through the invitation ceremonies of the rains retreat 20 times, may be given the full ordination. Spring is also the same. 
If she was born during the first rains, and has been through the invitation ceremonies at the end of the first rains retreat; or was born during the second rains, and has been through the invitation ceremonies at the end of the second rains retreat, (it’s also the same). If a girl has 20 rains, and half of the people think that she’s below 20, and the other half think that she’s 20, the ones who think that she’s below break a minor vinaya rule. Those who think she’s 20 incur no offense. That person is called fully ordained. If the girl has 20 rains, but everybody thinks that she’s not 20, and they give her the full ordination, they all break a minor vinaya rule. That person isn’t called fully ordained. If everybody thinks that she’s 20, they all incur no offense. That person is called fully ordained rightly.


“A girl” means she hasn’t yet broken celibacy. If she receives the full ordination, it’s a pācittiya. If a girl wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma, she should be asked: “When were you born?” If she doesn’t know, one should check the birth records. If there are none, one should ask the parents and relatives, and if they also don’t know, one should ask: “At the time of which king, the time of a great abundance, the time of a great famine?” If they again don’t know, one shouldn’t judge from their appearance. There are women who came from wealthy families, and who are young but look grown up. One should examine the bones and joints of her hands and feet. This is what the World-honored One said.