MgVb_ss19




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住迦維羅衛尼拘律樹釋氏精舍。時釋種女母子出家。母在外道中出家。語女言。我今母子如何生離。汝可來此共住。其女白言。我不得無故而來。當待有所因而來。於是女還與比丘尼共鬪瞋言。我今捨佛捨法捨僧。捨說捨共住共食捨經論。我非比丘尼非釋種。諸外道亦有勝法修梵行處。我用是沙門尼釋種為。我當於彼而修梵行。諸比丘尼諫是比丘尼言。阿梨耶。莫捨佛捨法捨僧。乃至莫捨釋種。捨佛者不善。乃至捨釋種者不善。一諫不止。二諫乃至三諫亦不止。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying at Kapilavatthu in the Sakyan Banyan Tree monastery. Then, women from a Sakyan family, a mother and her daughter, went forth. The mother went forth with non-Buddhist renunciates. She said to the daughter: “We’re now still mother and daughter. Why do we live apart like this? You can come here, and we’ll live together.” Her daughter answered: “I’m not allowed to come without a reason. Please wait, when there’s a reason I’ll come.” At that, the daughter returned, and while quarreling with the other bhikkhunīs, said angrily: “I now renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, renounce speaking, renounce living in community, renounce eating together, and renounce the discourses and treatises. I’m not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan follower. Non-Buddhist renunciates also have superior teachings and places to practise the monastic life. What use are these Sakyan renunciates to me? I’ll practise the monastic life with others.” The bhikkhunīs admonished her: “Venerable, don’t renounce the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. … Don’t renounce being a Sakyan follower. Renouncing the Buddha isn’t good. … Renouncing to be a Sakyan follower isn’t good.” When she was admonished for the first time, she didn’t stop. At the second … third admonishment, she also didn’t stop.


<lzh>諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。汝去先屏處三諫多人中三諫僧中三諫令捨此事。屏處諫者。屏處應問言。汝實瞋恚言我捨戒我捨佛。乃至用沙門尼釋種為。當於餘勝處修梵行耶。答言實爾。屏處應諫。汝莫捨戒捨佛。捨法捨僧。乃至捨沙門尼釋種。捨佛者不善。乃至捨沙門尼釋種不善。我今慈心。欲利益汝故諫汝。一諫已過二諫在。捨是事不。答言不捨。第二第三亦如是。多人中三諫亦爾。若不捨者。僧中應作求聽羯磨。問如屏處中說。猶故不止。</lzh>

The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “You should first go to a secluded place to admonish her three times, among a few people three times, and within the sangha three times to make her give up this matter. “Admonishing in a secluded place” means you should ask in a secluded place: ‘Did you really resentfully say: “I renounce the precepts, I renounce the Buddha, … What use are these Sakyan renunciates to me? I’ll practise the monastic life in another, superior place?”’ If she answers: ‘I really said this,’ then she should be admonished in a secluded place: ‘Don’t renounce the precepts and the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, … the Sakyan renunciates. Renouncing the Buddha isn’t good. … Renouncing the Sakyan renunciates isn’t good. I now admonish you out of compassion, wanting to benefit you. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give up this matter?’ If she answers: ‘I don’t give it up,’ she should be admonished like this a second and third time. “Among a few people” are also three admonishment like this. If she doesn’t give it up, you should carry out a formal act to request permission within the sangha. You should ask as explained for the secluded place.” Still she didn’t stop.


<lzh>諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。呼比丘尼來。來已佛具問上事。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事乃至非法非律不如佛教。不可以是長養善法。佛告大愛道。依止迦維羅衛住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he fully asked her about this matter: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. … This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Kapilavatthu. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼瞋恚欲捨戒作是言。我捨佛捨法捨僧。捨說捨共住捨共食捨經論。捨沙門尼釋種。用是沙門尼釋種為。餘更有勝處。我於彼中修梵行。諸比丘尼應諫是比丘尼言。阿梨耶。莫瞋恚捨戒作是言。我捨佛乃至捨沙門尼釋種。捨佛者不善諸比丘尼如是諫時。故堅持不捨應第二第三諫。捨是事好。若不捨是法乃至三諫。僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī resentfully wants to renounce the precepts, and says: ‘I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, renounce speaking, renounce living in community, renounce eating together, renounce the discourses and treatises, and renounce the Sakyan renunciates. What use are these Sakyan renunciates to me? There are other superior places. I’ll practise the monastic life there,’ the bhikkhunīs should admonish her: ‘Venerable, don’t resentfully renounce the precepts, and say: “I renounce the Buddha, … I renounce the Sakyan renunciates.” Renouncing the Buddha isn’t good.’ If she, when admonished by the bhikkhunīs like this, persists firmly, and doesn’t give it up, she should be admonished a second and a third time. If she gives up this matter, it’s fine. If not, this rule is a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者。如釋種女欲捨戒捨佛乃至捨沙門尼。諸比丘尼者。若僧多人及一人。三諫者。屏處三諫多人中三諫僧中三諫捨者善。若不捨者是法乃至三諫。僧伽婆尸沙。僧伽婆尸沙者如上說。屏處諫時捨者善。若不捨者諫諫越比尼罪。多人中亦爾。僧中初諫越比尼。諫竟偷蘭遮。第二初諫亦越比尼。諫竟偷蘭遮。第三初諫偷蘭遮。諫竟僧伽婆尸沙。僧伽婆尸沙罪起已屏處多人中僧中成一重罪。作僧伽婆尸沙治。若中間止隨止處治。是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” means like the Sakyan woman who wants to renounce the precepts, the Buddha, … the renunciates. “The bhikkhunīs” means the sangha, a few people, or one person. “Three admonishments” means in a secluded place three times, among a few people three times, and within the sangha three times. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If she doesn’t give it up, this rule is a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments. “A saṅghādisesa” is as explained above. If, when she’s admonished in a secluded place, she gives it up, it’s fine. If she doesn’t give it up, for each admonishment she breaks a minor vinaya rule. Among a few people, it’s also like this. Within the sangha, during the first admonishment, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the second admonishment, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the third admonishment, it’s a thullaccaya. When the admonishment is over, it’s a saṅghādisesa. When she has broken the saṅghādisesa, all offenses from the secluded place, from among a few people, and from within the sangha are turned into one grave offense that’s cleared with the saṅghādisesa procedure. If she stops in between, then they should be dealt with according to the point where she stopped. This is what the World-honored One said.


<lzh>阿梨耶僧聽已說十九僧伽婆尸沙法。十二是初罪。七乃至三諫。若比丘尼犯一一罪。半月二部眾中行摩那埵。次到阿浮呵那。二十僧二部眾中應出罪稱可眾人意。二十人中若少一人。此比丘尼不名出罪。諸比丘比丘尼應呵責。是名時。是中清淨不。第二第三亦問。是中清淨不。是中清淨默然故。是事如是持。</lzh>

May the noble sangha listen. The 19 saṅghādisesa rules have been recited; 12 immediate offenses and seven offenses after the third admonishment.<note>The pātimokkha states that there are eleven immediate offenses and eight offenses after the third admonishment.</note> If a bhikkhunī has committed any of these offenses, she should undergo probation<note>Mānatta.</note> for half a month before both assemblies. She then reaches the rehabilitation<note>Abbhāna</note>. A sangha of 20 in both assemblies should rehabilitate her, if it pleases all the members of the assembly. If there’s one person less than 20, the bhikkhunī doesn’t count as rehabilitated, and the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs should be criticized. This is called the right time. Are you pure herein? A second and third time, it’s asked again: Are you pure herein? You’re pure herein, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.




<h2>Summary Verse</h2>


<lzh-verse>使行二無根 相言獨行宿
不聽犯罪女 渡河并自捨
受漏心人施 勸彼令取施
十二是初罪 破僧并相助
瞋恚而謗僧 戾語習近住
勸住瞋還戒 第二篇說竟</lzh-verse>

<verse>Being a messenger, two unfounded ones, disputing, walking alone, spending the night alone,
Without permission, a criminal, crossing a river, lifting oneself,
Accepting gifts from a man with a defiled mind, instructing others to receive gifts,
These 12 are immediate offenses. Splitting the sangha, and helping,
Resentfully slandering the sangha, speaking contrarily, living closely together,
Instructing to live together, angrily returning the precepts, the second chapter has been recited.<note>The Pārājikas are counted as the first chapter.</note></verse>