MgVb_pj8




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住拘睒彌瞿師羅園。爾時闡陀。五眾罪中犯若一若二。諸比丘言。長老闡陀。汝見是罪不。答言。汝用問我見不見為我不見。諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊。佛語比丘。是闡陀於五眾罪中若犯一一而言不見者。僧應與作不見罪舉羯磨。僧與作不見罪舉羯磨已。往詣比丘尼精舍言。婆路醯諦。僧與我作舉羯磨。不共法食味食。即言怪哉。今我共汝法食味食。即便隨順。比丘尼諫言。闡陀母。是闡陀僧和合如法作舉羯磨。未作如法莫隨順。答言。我是其母是我所生。我不隨順誰當隨順。比丘尼即語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言是闡陀母比丘尼僧如法作舉羯磨而隨順者。汝應屏處三諫。眾多人中三諫。僧中三諫。令捨此事。屏處諫者。應問言。汝實知闡陀僧如法作舉羯磨而隨順耶。答言實爾。應諫言。闡陀母。僧如法作舉羯磨。未作如法莫隨順。我今慈心諫汝。欲饒益故。一諫已過二諫在。捨此事不。如是第二第三諫亦如是。眾多人中三諫亦如是。若不捨者。僧中應作求聽羯磨。應作是說。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Kosambī in Ghosita’s park. At that time, Chanda<note>This bhikkhu is probably the same person as the Pāli tradition’s bhikkhu Channa, who in lay life had been the Buddha’s charioteer.</note> had broken one or two rules of the five groups of offenses<note>pārājikas, saṅghādisesas, pācittiyas, pātidesanīyas, minor rules.</note>. The bhikkhus said: “Venerable Chanda, do you see the offense?” He answered: “What’s the use of your asking me if I see it? I don’t see it.” For this reason, the bhikkhus went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said to the bhikkhus: “If Chanda has broken any rule of the five groups of offenses and says that he doesn’t see it, the sangha should carry out an act of suspension for not seeing an offense.” When the sangha had carried out an act of suspension for not seeing an offense, he went to the bhikkhunī monastery and said (to his mother Chandamātā): “Relative, please note that the sangha has carried out an act of suspension against me. I may not take dhamma nourishment or material nourishment together with them.” She then said: “How strange! Now I’ll take dhamma nourishment or material nourishment together with you.” Then she followed him. 
The bhikkhunīs admonished her: “Chandamātā, the sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension against Chanda according to dhamma. He hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma. Don’t follow him.” She answered: “I’m his mother, I gave birth to him. If I don’t follow him, who will follow him?” The bhikkhunīs then told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went and informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Chandamātā bhikkhunī follows someone against whom the sangha has carried out an act of suspension according to dhamma. You should admonish her three times in a secluded place, among a few people three times, and within the sangha three times to make her give up this matter. “Admonishing in a secluded place” means that you should ask: ‘Did you really, knowing that the sangha has carried out an act of suspension against Chanda according to dhamma, follow him?’ If she answers: ‘I really did this,’ you should admonish her: ‘Chandamātā, the sangha has carried out an act of suspension according to dhamma. He hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma. Don’t follow him. I now admonish you out of compassion, wanting to benefit you. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give up this matter?’ In this way, she should be admonished a second and a third time. “Among a few people” are also three admonishments like this. If she doesn’t give it up, a formal act to request permission<note>Pāli: apalokana-kamma.</note> should be carried out in the sangha. You should say:’




<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>


<lzh>阿梨耶僧聽。僧與闡陀如法作舉羯磨。未作如法。闡陀母與隨順。已屏處三諫多人中三諫令捨此事而不捨。若僧時到。僧今亦當三諫令捨此事。僧中應問闡陀母。汝實知和合僧如法與闡陀作舉羯磨。未作如法而汝隨順。已屏處三諫。眾多人中三諫。令捨此事而不捨耶。答言實爾。即應諫言。僧和合如法與闡陀作舉羯磨。汝莫隨順。僧欲饒益故諫汝。汝當隨順僧語。一諫已過二諫在。汝捨不。答言不捨。如是第二第三諫</lzh>

Venerables, may the sangha listen. The sangha has carried out an act of suspension against Chanda according to dhamma. He hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma. Chandamātā follows him. She has been admonished three times in a secluded place and three times among a few people to make her give up this matter, but she hasn’t given it up. If the right time has come for the sangha, the sangha should now also admonish her three times to make her give up this matter.’ In the sangha, you should ask: ‘Chandamātā, did you really, knowing that the sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension against Chanda according to dhamma and that he hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma, follow him? And having been admonished three times in a secluded place and three times among a few people to make you give up this matter, you haven’t given it up?’ If she answers: ‘I really did this,’ then you should admonish her: ‘The sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension against Chanda according to dhamma. Don’t follow him. The sangha admonishes you wanting to benefit you. You should follow the sangha’s advice. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give it up?’ If she answers: ‘I don’t give it up,’ she should be admonished like this a second and third time.”




<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>


<lzh>猶言不捨。
比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言喚來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝常不聞我無量方便毀呰佷戾難諫稱譽易諫也。此非法非律非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。汝云何被舉比丘而隨順。從今日後。不聽隨順被舉比丘。佛語瞿曇彌。依止拘睒彌比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

They said it thus, and she still didn’t give it up.
For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon her.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Have you not often heard me with countless skillful means criticize being contrary and difficult to admonish, and praise being easy to admonish? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this. Why did you follow a suspended bhikkhu? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to follow a suspended bhikkhu.” The Buddha told Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Kosambī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼知僧和合如法比尼與比丘作舉羯磨。未作如法而隨順。諸比丘尼應諫是比丘尼。阿梨耶。是比丘僧和合如法比尼作舉羯磨。未作如法莫隨順是比丘。諸比丘尼諫時作是語。我不隨順誰當隨順。諸比丘尼如是第二第三諫捨是事好。若不捨者是比丘尼波羅夷不應共住。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī knows that the sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension against a bhikkhu according to dhamma and vinaya, and that he hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma, and follows him, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her: “Venerable, the sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension against that bhikkhu according to dhamma and vinaya, and he hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma; don’t follow that bhikkhu.” If she, when admonished by the bhikkhunīs, says: “If I don’t follow him, who will follow him?”, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her like this a second and a third time. If she gives up this matter, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī is pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。知者。若自知若從他聞和合者。非別眾。如法比尼者。不見罪不作罪。三見不捨。三者。謗契經邪見邊見。被舉者。不共住。未作如法者。未隨順僧。未解隨順者。共法食味食。諸比丘尼諫是比丘尼作是語。阿梨耶。是比丘僧如法比尼作舉羯磨。未作如法莫隨順法食味食。諫時便作是語。我不隨順誰當隨順。應重諫乃至三諫。捨者善。若不捨者是比丘尼波羅夷。波羅夷者如上說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Knows” means she either knows herself or hears it from others. “In harmony” means an undivided asssembly. “According to dhamma and vinaya” means for not seeing an offense, for not clearing it, or for not giving up the three (wrong) views. “Three (wrong views)” means speaking ill of the suttas, wrong view, and (the two) extreme views<note>eternalism and annihilationism.</note>. “Suspended” means he can’t live in community. “Not yet acted according to dhamma” means he hasn’t yet gon along with the sangha, and hasn’t yet been reinstated. “Following” means taking dhamma nourishment or material nourishment together with him. The bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī like this: “Venerable, the bhikkhu sangha has carried out an act of suspension against this bhikkhu according to dhamma and vinaya. He hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma. Don’t follow him, or take dhamma nourishment or material nourishment with him.” If she, when admonished, still says: “If I don’t follow him, who will follow him?”, she should be heavily admonished up to three times. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī is pārājika. “A pārājika” is as explained above. 


<lzh>屏處三諫捨者善。若不捨者諫。諫越比尼罪。眾多人中亦如是僧中初諫時越比尼罪。諫竟偷蘭遮。第二初諫時越比尼諫竟偷蘭遮。第三初諫時偷蘭遮。諫竟波羅夷。若屏處眾多人中僧中一切越比尼。一切偷蘭遮。成一重罪名波羅夷。若中間捨者隨事治。</lzh>

If she, when admonished three times in a secluded place, gives it up, it’s fine. If not, she breaks a minor vinaya rule for each admonishment. Among a few people is also the same. Within the sangha, during the first admonishment, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the second admonishment, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the third admonishment, it’s a thullaccaya. When the admonishment is over, it’s a pārājika. All minor vinaya breaches and thullaccayas from the secluded place, from among a few people, and from within the sangha turn into one grave offense, namely the pārājika. If she gives it up in between, they should be dealt with accordingly.




<h2>Summary Verse</h2>


<lzh-verse>婬盜斷人命 不實稱過人
肩以下膝上 漏心八事滿
覆重并隨舉 八波羅夷竟</lzh-verse>

<verse>Sexual intercourse, stealing, taking a human life, claiming a superhuman state untruthfully,
Below the shoulders and above the knees, fulfilling eight things with a defiled mind,
Covering up a grave offense, following a suspended, the eight pārājikas are finished.</verse>