MgVb_pc124




<beginh2>Origin Story<endh2>


<beginchinese>佛住王舍城。爾時六群比丘尼先到作伎樂處。占顧坐處伎兒戲時高聲大笑。眾人效笑。人笑時便復默然似如坐禪人。笑適止。還復拍手大笑。於是眾人捨伎兒而觀比丘尼。時伎兒不得雇直。瞋恚嫌責。坐是沙門尼。令我失雇直。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。乃至答言。實爾佛言。此是惡事。汝云何觀伎樂。從今已後。不聽觀伎樂。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Rājagaha. At that time, the group-of-six bhikkhunīs were the first to arrive at a place where there was a musical performance. They took seats, and laughed greatly and loudly during the actor’s play. The crowd then also laughed. When the people laughed, the bhikkhunīs became silent again, and sat as though they were meditating. When the laughing stopped, they again clapped their hands and laughed loudly. Therefore, the crowd stopped watching the actors, and just looked at the bhikkhunīs. Then the actors didn’t get any remuneration. Resentful, they rebuked them: “Because these renunciates sat there, we lost our pay.” 
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, … They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you watch a musical performance? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to watch a musical performance.” … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<beginh2>Final Ruling<endh2>


<beginchinese>若比丘尼觀伎樂行波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī goes to watch a musical performance, it’s a pācittiya.”




<beginh2>Explanation<endh2>


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。伎樂者舞伎歌伎鐃盤打鼓如是一切。下至四人共戲。觀看者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。不得觀伎樂。若比丘尼乞食值王王夫人。若天像出有伎樂者遇見無罪。若下處就高作意闚望逐看波夜提若檀越欲供養佛。作眾伎樂研香結鬘。語比丘尼言阿梨耶。佐我安施供養具。爾時得助作。若於彼間聞樂。有欲著心者當捨去。若比丘觀伎樂者越毘尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “A musical performance” means a dance performance, a singing performance, the striking of cymbals and the beating of drums, and all similar performances, even just four-person plays. If she watches, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. One may not watch a musical performance. If a bhikkhunī on almsround meets the king or the queen, or if a heavenly being appears, and there is a musical performance that she happens to see, there is no offense. If from a low place, she makes herself taller to pay attention and continue to watch, it’s a pācittiya. If a supporter wants to make an offering to the Buddha by arranging musical performances, grinding perfumes, and binding garlands, and he says to the bhikkhunī: “Venerable, help me to set up the things for the giving of the offering,” then she may help. If while she’s there, she hears the music and desire arises in her mind, she should abandon what she’s doing and leave. If a bhikkhu watches a musical performance, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.