MgVb_pc87




<beginh2>Origin Story<endh2>


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼共餘比丘尼諍鬪。便相呪誓言。南無佛指佛誓。指阿闍梨誓袈裟邊誓。若我作是者。我不在袈裟中死。不得斷苦邊。得殺父母罪得背恩罪。得謗賢聖罪。入泥犁墮餓鬼墮畜生。我若爾者當入是諸趣。汝若爾者亦當入是諸趣中。
諸比丘尼聞已語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何出家人作是呪誓。此非法非律非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī quarreled with the other bhikkhunīs, and she cursed them by swearing oaths such as the “namo Buddhāya,” swearing on the Buddha, swearing on the teachers, and swearing on the robe: “If I did this, may I not die in robes. May I not reach the end of suffering, may I commit the crime of killing my parents, may I commit the offense of ingratitude, may I commit the offense of slandering wise noble ones, may I enter into hell or fall into the ghost or animal realms. If I did such a thing, then may I enter into these existences. But if you did such a thing, then may you enter into these existences.” 
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you, a renunciate, speak curses by swearing? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<beginh2>Final Ruling<endh2>


<beginchinese>若比丘尼自呪誓呪他者波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī curses herself or others by swearing, it’s a pācittiya.”




<beginh2>Explanation<endh2>


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。自呪誓者。南無佛指佛誓。指阿闍梨誓。我若爾者。當得如提婆達多罪。得妄語罪。得背恩罪。得兩舌罪。若我爾者。梵行不成就。不在袈裟中死。入泥梨墮畜生餓鬼。若汝謗我者。亦當得是罪。作是誓者波夜提。若比丘作是誓越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Cursing herself by swearing” means the namo Buddhāya, swearing on the Buddha, or swearing on the teachers: “If I did such a thing, may I incur an offense like Devadatta, an offense of false speech, an offense of ingratitude, an offense of slander. If I did such a thing, may my monastic life not be successful, may I not die in robes, and may I enter into hell or fall into the animal or ghost realms. But if you slandered me, then may you incur these offenses.” Swearing like this is a pācittiya. If a bhikkhu swears like this, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.