MgVb_pc132




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時長老比丘教誡比丘尼。爾時六群比丘不得教誡。次便作是言。我等教誡去又言。世尊制戒。不聽不差而教誡。我等當出界外。展轉相拜而去。即出界外展轉相拜已。晨朝著衣往到比丘尼住處。語比丘尼言。姊妹盡集。我當教誡。時六群比丘尼即便速集。善比丘尼不來。而作是言。我不能非毘尼人邊受教誡。時六群比丘共六群比丘尼作世俗語已。須臾間而去。爾時長老難陀著衣持鉢。來到精舍言。姊妹集僧我欲教誡。於是善比丘尼盡集。六群比丘尼不來。長老問言。比丘尼僧集未。答言不集。誰不集。答言。六群比丘尼。即遣信喚。姊妹來我欲教誡答言。我不去。已六群阿闍梨邊受教誡竟。時長老言尼僧不和合。即起而去。佛知而故問。汝教誡何以速。答言世尊。我至時著衣往欲教誡。善比丘尼皆集。唯六群比丘尼不來。比丘尼僧不和合故不得教誡。
佛言。呼六群比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Sāvatthi. At that time, senior bhikkhus were instructing the bhikkhunīs. Then the group-of-six bhikkhus weren’t allowed to instruct. The next time, they said: “We’ll go to instruct.” They also added: “The World-honored One has laid down a precept that it’s not allowed to instruct unauthorized. We’ll leave the territory to appoint each other, and then go.” Then they appointed each other outside the territory. When it was morning, they put on their robes, and went to the bhikkhunīs’ residence. They said to the bhikkhunīs: “Sisters, have everyone assemble. We’ll instruct you.” At that time, the group-of-six bhikkhunīs then quickly assembled. The virtuous bhikkhunīs didn’t come and said: “We can’t receive instruction from people who don’t keep vinaya.” Then when the group-of-six bhikkhus and the group-of-six bhikkhunīs had talked about worldly matters, they left instantly. At that time, the venerable Nanda put on his robes, took his bowl, came to the monastery and said: “Sisters, convene the sangha, I want to instruct you.” At this, the virtuous bhikkhunīs all assembled. The group-of-six bhikkhunīs didn’t come. The venerable (Nandā) asked: “Has the bhikkhunī sangha assembled?” They answered: “It hasn’t (fully) assembled.” “Who hasn’t assembled?” They answered: “The group-of-six bhikkhunīs.” “Then send a message to summon them. When the sisters have come, I want to instruct you.” They answered: “We won’t come. We’ve already received instruction from the teachers of the group-of-six.” Then the venerable (Nandā) said: “The bhikkhunī sangha isn’t in harmony,” and he got up and left. The Buddha knew about this and intentionally asked him: “Why was your instruction so fast?” He answered: “World-honored One, when the time had come, I put on my robes and went there, wanting to instruct. The virtuous bhikkhunīs all assembled. Only the group-of-six bhikkhunīs didn’t come. Because the bhikkhunī sangha wasn’t in harmony, it’s not allowed to instruct.”
The Buddha said: “Summon the group-of-six bhikkhunīs.” When they came, he asked them: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this.” … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼半月僧教誡。而不恭敬不來波夜提。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī doesn’t respect and doesn’t attend the half-monthly instruction of the sangha, it’s a pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。半月者十四日十五日僧教誡者教誡比丘尼。不恭敬不來者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若老羸病服藥刺頭出血服酥。應與欲作是言。我某甲與教誡欲。如是三說。若不病不去。病不與欲波夜提。若至布薩日。應差比丘尼持欲詣僧。作如是言。比丘尼僧和合。頭面禮比丘僧足。問布薩請教誡。如是三說。比丘僧中有教誡尼者。應語。姊妹當住。若有比丘成就十二法者。應羯磨教誡。若無者當語言。無教誡比丘尼人莫放逸。是故世尊說也。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Half-monthly” means on the fourteenth or the fifteenth day. “Instruction of the sangha” means instruction of the bhikkhunīs. If she doesn’t respect and doesn’t attend, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If she’s old, weak, sick, taking medicine, has cut her head and is bleeding, or taking ghee, she should give consent by saying: “I, So-and-so, give consent for the instruction.” Like this, she should speak three times. If she’s not sick and doesn’t go, or if she’s sick and doesn’t give consent, it’s a pācittiya. When the uposatha day has come, (the sangha) should send bhikkhunīs to take consent, go to the bhikkhu sangha, and say: “The bhikkhunī sangha in harmony pays respect with their heads at the bhikkhu sangha’s feet. We ask for the uposatha and invite for the instruction.” Like this, they should speak three times. If there’s an instructor of bhikkhunīs in the bhikkhu sangha, they should say: “May the sisters stay.” If there’s a bhikkhu who fulfills the 12 requirements, they should do the formal act for the instruction. If there’s nobody, they should say: “There’s no instructor of bhikkhunīs, don’t be negligent.” This is what the World-honored One said.