MgVb_ss17




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時有二比丘尼。一名真檀。是釋家女。二名欝多羅。身習近住。口習近住。身口習近住。迭相覆過。身習近者。共床眠共床坐同器食。迭互著衣共出共入。口習近者。染污心語迭相覆罪。此犯彼覆彼犯此覆。身口習近者。二事俱。比丘尼諫言。阿梨耶。莫身習近住口習近住。莫身口習近住。莫迭相覆過。何以故。不生善法。一諫二諫三諫不止。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已佛問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何身口習近住迭相覆過。此非法非律非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, there were two bhikkhunīs, one called Nandā, the Sakyan woman, and the other called Uttarā. They lived closely together by body, by speech, and by body and speech, and they hid each other’s transgressions. “Closely together by body” means sleeping on the same bed, sitting on the same bed, eating with the same utensils, wearing each other’s robes, going out and returning together. “Closely together by speech” means speaking with a defiled mind, and hiding each others offenses. What the first committed, the second hid, what the second committed, the first hid. “Closely together by body and speech” means these two things together. The bhikkhunīs admonished them: “Venerables, don’t live closely together by body, by speech, and by body and speech. Don’t hide each other’s transgressions. Why? It doesn’t give rise to wholesome states.” After one, two, and three admonishments, they didn’t stop.
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and for this reason, she then went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon those bhikkhunīs.” When they came, he asked them: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you live closely together by body and speech, and hide each other’s transgressions? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若二比丘尼習近住迭相覆過。諸比丘尼應諫是比丘尼言。阿梨耶。莫習近住迭相覆過。習近住不生善法。是比丘尼。諸比丘尼諫時。堅持不捨。應第二第三諫。捨是事善。若不捨是法乃至三諫。僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>

If two bhikkhunīs live closely together, and hide each other’s transgressions, the bhikkhunīs should admonish those bhikkhunīs: ‘Venerables, don’t live closely together, and hide each other’s transgressions. Living closely together doesn’t give rise to wholesome states.’ If those bhikkhunīs, when admonished by the bhikkhunīs, persist firmly, and don’t give it up, they should be admonished a second and a third time. If they give up this matter, it’s fine. If not, this rule is a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments.”