MgVb_ss18




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時世尊制戒。不聽習近住。時真檀釋家女。欝多羅比丘尼。各自別住。偷蘭難陀比丘尼言。阿梨耶。但習近住互相藏過莫相遠住。不妨生善法。餘人亦有如是相近住。僧不能遮。輕易汝故共相禁制耳。諸比丘尼諫是比丘尼阿梨耶。莫作是語。但習近住互相藏過莫相遠住不妨生長善法。乃至輕易汝故共相禁制。如是一諫不止。二諫三諫不止。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down the precept that it’s not allowed to live closely together. Then Nandā, the Sakyan woman, and Uttarā bhikkhunī lived separated. Thullanandā bhikkhunī said: “Venerables, just live closely together, cover up each other’s transgressions, don’t live apart from each other. It doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. There are also other people who live closely together like this, and the sangha is unable to stop them. It’s just because they don’t take you seriously that they restrain you.” The bhikkhunīs admonished her: “Venerable, don’t say this: ‘Just live closely together, cover up each other’s transgressions, don’t live apart from each other. It doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. … It’s just because they don’t take you seriously that they restrain you.’” When she was admonished for the first time like this, she didn’t stop. At the second and third admonishment, she also didn’t stop.


<lzh>諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。是真檀釋家女欝多羅比丘尼相遠住。偷蘭難陀比丘尼勸令習近共住不妨生善法者。當屏處三諫多人中三諫僧中三諫令捨此事。屏處諫者。應作是言。偷蘭難陀。汝實語真檀比丘尼欝多羅比丘尼言。但習近住互相藏過莫相遠住不妨生善法。餘人亦有如是相近住者。僧不能遮。輕易汝故共相禁制耶。答言實爾。應諫言。汝莫作是語。相習近住互相藏過莫相遠住。不妨生善法。餘人亦有如是相習近住者。僧不能遮。輕易汝故共相禁制。我今慈心饒益故諫汝。一諫已過二諫在。汝捨不。答言不捨。如是第二第三。多人中亦如是諫。若不捨者。僧中應作求聽羯磨。唱言。</lzh>

The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Nandā, the Sakyan woman, and Uttarā bhikkhunī live apart. Thullanandā bhikkhunī instructs them to make them live closely together, and (claims that) it doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. She should be admonished three times in a secluded place, three times among a few people, and three times within the sangha to make her give up this matter. “Admonishing in a secluded place” means you should say: ‘Thullanandā, did you really say to Nandā bhikkhunī and Uttarā bhikkhunī: “Just live closely together, and cover up each other’s transgressions, don’t live apart from each other. It doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. There are also other people who live closely together like this, and the sangha is unable to stop them. It’s just because they don’t take you seriously that they restrain you.”’ If she answers: ‘I really said this,’ then she should be admonished: ‘Don’t say this: “Just live closely together, cover up each other’s transgressions, don’t live apart from each other. It doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. There are also other people who live closely together like this, and the sangha is unable to stop them. It’s just because they don’t take you seriously that they restrain you.” I now admonish you out of compassion, wanting to benefit you. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give it up?’ If she answers: ‘I don’t give it up,’ she should be admonished like this a second and third time. “Among a few people” is also an admonishment like this. If she doesn’t give it up, you should carry out a formal act to request permission within the sangha. You should announce:




<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>


<lzh>阿梨耶僧聽。偷蘭難陀比丘尼。勸真檀釋家女欝多羅比丘尼。相習近住互相藏過不妨生善法。已屏處三諫多人中三諫不止。若僧時到。僧今亦應三諫令捨此事。僧中應問偷蘭難陀。汝實勸相習近住。乃至僧今慈心諫汝。欲利益故。一諫已過二諫在。汝捨不。</lzh>

‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. Thullanandā bhikkhunī has instructed Nandā, the Sakyan woman, and Uttarā bhikkhunī that living closely together, and covering up each other’s transgressions doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. She has been admonished three times in a secluded place, and three times among a few people, but she hasn’t given it up. If the right time has come for the sangha, the sangha should now admonish her three times to make her give up this matter.’ Within the sangha, you should ask: ‘Thullanandā, did you really instruct them to live closely together? … The sangha now admonishes you out of compassion, wanting to benefit you. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give up this matter?’”




<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>


<lzh>答言不捨。第二第三諫故不捨。
諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已佛問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。乃至佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

She answered: “I don’t give it up.” At the second and third admonishment, she also didn’t give it up.
For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. …” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼見相遠住。便勸作是言。當習近住迭相藏過莫相離住不妨生長善法。餘人亦有如是相習近住者。僧不能遮。輕易汝故相禁制耳。諸比丘尼應諫是比丘尼言。阿梨耶。某甲某甲相遠住。莫勸習近住遞相覆過習近住不妨生善法。莫作是語。餘人亦有習近住僧不能遮輕易汝故相禁制耳。是比丘尼。諸比丘尼諫時。堅持不捨。應第二第三諫。捨者善。若不捨者。是法乃至三諫。僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī sees that they’re living apart from each other, and instructs them: ‘You should live closely together, and cover up each other’s offenses. Don’t live away from each other. It doesn’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. There are also other people who live closely together like this, and the sangha is unable to stop them. It’s just because they don’t take you seriously that they restrain you,’ the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: ‘Venerable, So-and-so and So-and-so live apart from each other. Don’t instruct them to live closely together, to hide each other’s transgressions, and (claim that) living closely together won’t obstruct the arising of wholesome states. Don’t say: “There are also other people who live closely together like this, and the sangha is unable to stop them. It’s just because they don’t take you seriously, that they restrain you.”’ If that bhikkhunī when admonished by the bhikkhunīs persists firmly, and doesn’t give it up, she should be admonished a second and a third time. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, this rule is a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>相遠住者。如真檀釋家女欝多羅比丘尼。勸者。如偷蘭難陀比丘尼。習近住者。身相習近口相習近身口相習近覆者。身口過。此身口過彼覆藏彼身口過此覆藏是比丘尼者。如偷蘭難陀比丘尼。諸比丘尼者。僧多人一人。三諫者屏處三諫多人中三諫僧中三諫。屏處諫者。屏處應問。汝實勸某甲某甲比丘尼莫相遠離住。乃至答言。實爾。屏處應諫作是語莫爾。阿梨耶。某甲某甲相遠住。作是教言相習近住。乃至一諫不止。二諫三諫不止。多人中亦爾。僧中三諫不止。是法乃至三諫不捨。僧伽婆尸沙。僧伽婆尸沙者如上說。若比丘尼屏處三諫。諫諫越比尼罪。多人中三諫。諫諫越比尼罪。僧中初諫越比尼罪。諫竟偷蘭遮。第二初諫越比尼罪諫竟偷蘭遮。第三初諫偷蘭遮。諫竟僧伽婆尸沙。成僧伽婆尸沙已屏處多人中僧中。一切越比尼罪偷蘭遮合成一僧伽婆尸沙罪治。若中間止。隨止處治罪。是故說。</lzh>

“Living apart from each other” means like Nandā, the Sakyan woman, and Uttarā bhikkhunī. “Instructing” means like Thullanandā bhikkhunī. “Living closely together” means closely together by body, by speech, and by body and speech. “Hiding” means the bodily and verbal transgressions. The first one’s bodily and verbal transgressions are hid and covered up by the second, and the second one’s bodily and verbal transgressions are hid and covered up by the first. “That bhikkhunī” means like Thullanandā bhikkhunī. “The bhikkhunīs” means the sangha, a few people, or one person. “Three admonishments” means in a secluded place three times, among a few people three times, and within the sangha three times. “Admonishing in a secluded place” means that you should ask in a secluded place: “Did you really instruct bhikkhunīs So-and-so and So-and-so: ‘Don’t live away from each other. … ?’” If she answers: ‘I really said this,’ then you should admonish her in a secluded place: “Don’t do this. Venerable, So-and-so and So-and-so are living apart. You taught them to live closely together. …” If, at the first admonishment, she doesn’t stop, and at the second and third admonishments, she also doesn’t stop, then it should be done in the same way among a few people. If within the sangha she doesn’t stop after three admonishments, then this rule is a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments. “A saṅghādisesa” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī is admonished three times in a secluded place, for each admonishment she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she’s admonished three times among a few people, for each admonishment she breaks a minor vinaya rule. Within the sangha, during the first admonishment, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the second admonishment, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the third admonishment, it’s a thullaccaya. When the admonishment is over, it’s a saṅghādisesa. When she has broken the saṅghādisesa, all minor vinaya breaches and thullaccayas from the secluded place, from among a few people, and from within the sangha are cleared with the saṅghādisesa procedure. If she stops in between, then they should be dealt with according to the point where she stopped. This is what was said.