MgVb_pc73




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時有比丘尼。如女人著衣。為世人所嫌。云何比丘尼著長衣曳縷而行。如世間女人。此壞敗人何道之有。比丘尼聞已語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。呼比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。從今已後。不聽合縷作衣。當應量作。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a bhikkhunī who wore her robe like a (lay)woman. The lay people became angry: “Why does that bhikkhunī walk around wearing a long robe with strands trailing behind, like a worldly woman? What kind of path can such a degenerated person possess?” 
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and fully informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to make a robe with strands attached. It should be made to the measurements.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼作安陀會應量作。長四修伽陀搩手。廣二搩手。若過作截已波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī makes a lower robe, she should make it according to the measurements: four sugata handspans in length, two handspans in width. If she makes it larger, it’s to be cut off, and it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanations


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。安陀會者世尊所聽。作者若自作若使人作。應量者長四修伽陀搩手。修伽陀者善逝廣二搩手。若過量作截已波夜提悔過。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼長應量廣過量作。成波夜提。受用越比尼罪。如是廣應量長過量。如是邊應量中過量。中應量邊過量。如是屈量皺量。水灑量乾已欲令長廣。波夜提。受用越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Lower robe” means what the World-honored One allowed. “Makes” means either making it oneself or having others make it. “According to the measurements” means four sugata handspans in length. “Sugata” means the Well-gone One. The width is two handspans. If she exceeds these measurements, it’s to be cut off, and the pācittiya is to be confessed. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī makes it according to the measurements in length, but exceeds the measurements in width, the pācittiya is fulfilled. If she uses it, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. The same applies if she makes it according to the measurements in width, but exceeds the measurements in length; if she makes the border according to the measurements, but exceeds the measurements of the center; and if she makes the center according to the measurements, but exceeds the measurements of the border. The same also applies if she bends or wrinkles the cloth when measuring; or if she sprinkles it with water when measuring, wishing for it to become longer and wider after drying. (In all these cases,) it’s a pācittiya. If she uses it, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said. 