MgVb_pc141




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時六群比丘尼遊行勸化。語女人言。與我物。欲為諸比丘作食。女人即與作是言。至作食日語我。我當行食。時請尊者舍利弗大目連離波多劫賓那尊者羅睺羅。復請六群比丘。敷二坐。一與長老比丘。一與六群比丘。爾時長老比丘。時到著衣持鉢到舍次第而坐。與尊者舍利弗白米飯蒙巨羹酥乳酪。如是轉與麁食。尊者目連與麁米飯摩沙羹油乳。餘比丘與赤米飯摩沙羹。或有得飯不得羹。有得羹不得飯。乃至尊者羅云與赤米飯麻籸菜羹。時諸女人復持種種好食來。問言與誰。比丘尼便以身障長老比丘。示六群比丘。與白米飯好羹酥乳酪。自恣與。諸比丘食已而去。佛知而故問。舍利弗。得好食滿足不。答言已食。世尊。如是三問。答亦如是。如是一一問諸長老比丘。答皆如是。乃至問羅云。何故色力不足。得好食飽不。答言世尊。食油得力食酥有色。食麻籸菜無色無力問六群比丘得好食不。答言世尊。我得白米飯好羹酥酪種種好食。皆是姊妹信心恩力。佛言。上座是誰。答言。尊者舍利弗。
佛問舍利弗。汝實爾不。答言。實爾。世尊。佛言。此非法食。汝云何看是擾亂比丘僧而入捨心。舍利弗言。若世尊言。是非法食者。若一劫若過一劫不可得消。於是即取鳥翮擿而吐之。佛言。呼六群比丘尼來。來已問言汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何知眾利迴與一眾。從今已後不聽。乃至。已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī. At that time, the group-of-six bhikkhunīs were wandering around encouraging women: “Give us things. We want to prepare food for the bhikkhus.” The women then gave and said: “When the day of food preparation comes, tell us. We’ll serve the food.” Then they invited the venerables Sāriputta, Mahāmoggallāna, Revata, Kappina, and the venerable Rāhula. They also invited the group-of-six bhikkhus. The prepared two (areas with) seats, one for the senior bhikkhus, the other for the group-of-six bhikkhus. Then the senior bhikkhus, when the time had come, put on their robes, took their bowls, came to the building, and sat down in order of seniority. (The bhikkhunīs) gave the venerable Sāriputta white rice, mung bean curry, ghee, milk, and curd. As they moved on, they gave coarser food. To the venerable Moggallāna, they gave coarse rice, bean curry, oil, and milk. To the other bhikkhus, they just gave brown rice and bean curry. Some just got rice, but didn’t get curry. Others just got curry, but didn’t get rice. Finally, to the venerable Rāhula, they gave brown rice, sesame powder, and vegetable curry. Then the lay women also came with all kinds of good food, and asked: “To whom should we give this?” The bhikkhunīs blocked the senior bhikkhus from view with their bodies, and pointed out the group-of-six bhikkhus. They gave them white rice, good curries, ghee, milk, and curd, as much as they wanted. When the bhikkhus had eaten, they left. The Buddha knew about this and intentionally asked them: “Sāriputta, have you obtained good food, and was it sufficient?” He answered: “I’ve eaten, World-honored One.” In this way, he asked three times, and got the same answer. In such a way, he asked the senior bhikkhus one by one, and all answered like this. Finally he asked Rāhula: “Why are your appearance and strength not satisfactory? Did you get good food until you were satisfied?” He answered: “World-honored One, from eating oil, I get a pleasant appearance, from eating ghee I get strength. When I eat sesame powder with vegetables, I get neither a good appearance nor strength.” Then the Buddha asked the group-of-six bhikkhus: “Did you get good food?” They answered: “World-honored One, we got white rice, good curries, ghee, curd, and all kinds of good food. All thanks to our sisters’ faith, compassion, and effort.” The Buddha said: “Who was the senior bhikkhu?” They answered: “The venerable Sāriputta.” The Buddha asked Sāriputta: “Did you really do this?” He answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha said: “This is food against the dhamma. Why did you, when you saw this mistreatment of the bhikkhu sangha, enter a mindstate of detachment?” Sāriputta said: “If the World-honored One says that this food is against dhamma I can’t digest it even in an eon or more than an eon.” At this, he took a bird feather, scratched (his throat) with it, and vomitted. The Buddha said: “Summon the group-of-six bhikkhunīs.” When they came, he asked them: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you knowingly divert donations for one group to another group? From now on, it’s no longer allowed.” … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼。知眾利迴與一眾波夜提。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī knowingly diverts donations for one group to another group, it’s a pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。知者。若自知若從他聞。眾者。比丘眾比丘尼眾。利者。八種時藥夜分藥七日藥終身藥隨身物重物不淨物淨不淨物迴者。選物向處。已定而迴與餘眾。波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若人來問。我欲布施當施何處。應言隨汝心所樂處施。若言何處功德大。當言施僧。若問何處有好持戒僧。當言都無犯戒僧。若言何處有比丘比丘尼自守少事坐禪誦經不大遊行恒使我得見此物。得語言與某甲。若比丘尼。知物向僧迴向已。尼薩耆波夜提。若迴向餘人波夜提。眾迴向餘眾波夜提。眷屬迴向眷屬亦波夜提。一人物迴向一人越毘尼罪。比丘迴眾物與餘眾越比尼罪。是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Knowingly” means she either knows herself or hears it from others. “A group” means a group of bhikkhus, and a group of bhikkhunīs. “Donations” means the eight kinds: medicines at the proper time, nighttime medicines, seven-day medicines, lifetime medicines, things to be kept on the body, valuable things, impure things, and pure and impure things. “Diverting” means selecting things intended for one place and diverting them to another group; this is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If someone comes and asks: “I wish to make a donation. Where should I give it to?”, one should say: “Give to the place that makes your mind happy.” If they say: “In which place is there great merit?”, one should say: “Give to the sangha.” If they ask: “In which place is there a sangha that keeps the precepts well?”, one should say: “The sangha everywhere doesn’t break the precepts.” If they ask: “In which place are there bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs who keep the small rules, practise sitting meditation, recite the suttas, don’t wander around much, and always let me see my gift?”, it’s allowed to say: “Give to such-and-such.” If a bhikkhunī knowingly diverts an item for the sangha towards herself, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya. If she diverts it to another person, it’s a pācittiya. If she diverts an item for a group to another group, it’s a pācittiya. If she diverts an item for someone’s followers to someone else’s followers, it’s also a pācittiya. If she diverts an item for one person to another person, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If a bhikkhu diverts an item for a group to another group, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.




<h2>Summary Verse</h2>


<lzh-verse>教誡隱處癰 離宿不遊行
安居後嫌責 安居已後來
隔牆棄不淨 草水迴向僧
十四跋渠竟</lzh-verse>

<verse>Instructing, an abscess in a hidden place, spending the night away, not wandering
after the rains retreat, rebuking, arriving after someone has entered the rains retreat,
Throwing impure things over a wall, grass, water, diverting to a sangha.
The 14th chapter is finished.</verse>


<lzh>比丘同戒七十。不同戒七十一。百四十一波夜提修多羅說竟。</lzh>

70 precepts shared with the bhikkhus. 71 unshared precepts. The sutta of the 141 pācittiyas has been recited.