MgVb_pc92




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼一歲二歲三歲便畜弟子。不知教誡。如天羊天牛而自放恣。淨戒不具足。威儀不具足。不知恭奉和上尼阿闍梨。不知供奉長老比丘尼。不知入聚落法阿練若法。不知入僧中法。不知著衣持鉢。
諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。從今已後。不聽減十二雨畜弟子。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhunīs who had one, two, or three rains took on students. They didn’t know how to instruct them and were heedless themselves like heavenly goats and cows.<note>The Sanskrit parallel says “They flourished like Indra’s cattle, they flourished like Shiva’s goats.”</note> They didn’t keep pure precepts, they didn’t conduct themselves properly, they didn’t know how to behave respectfully towards their preceptors, teachers, and the senior bhikkhunīs. They didn’t know the rules for entering the village and the wilderness. They didn’t know the rules for being with the sangha, they didn’t know how to wear the robes and hold the bowl.
The bhikkhunīs went to the World-honored One and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon those bhikkhunīs.” When they came, he asked them: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed for someone with less than 12 rains to take on students.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼減十二雨畜弟子者波夜提。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī of less than 12 rains takes on a student, it’s a pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。減十二雨者減十二年。是名減十二雨。比丘尼減十二雨滿十二年。亦名減十二雨。比丘尼減十二雨過十二年。亦名減十二雨。比丘尼冬時受具足。數冬為十二未經自恣。是名減十二雨。若春時受具足。數春為十二。未經自恣。是名減十二雨。初安居時受具足。未經初安居時受自恣。是名減十二雨。後安居時受具足。未經後安居受自恣。是名減十二雨。比丘尼滿十二雨減十二年。是名滿十二雨。比丘尼滿十二雨滿十二年。如是過十二年。是名滿十二雨。比丘尼冬時受具足。經安居竟受自恣。是名滿十二雨。若春時受具足。經安居竟受自恣。如是初安居受具足已。經初安居竟受自恣。後安居受具足。經後安居受自恣。是名滿十二雨。比丘尼畜受具足者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼減十二雨度人者越比尼罪。受具足者波夜提。若比丘減十二雨度人受具足者越比尼罪。是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Less than 12 rains” means less than 12 years. This is called “less than 12 rains.” If a bhikkhunī has less than 12 rains but has 12 full calendar years, it’s still called “less than 12 rains”. If bhikkhunī has less than 12 rains but has more than 12 calendar years, it’s still called “less than 12 rains”. If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination in winter, and has 12 full winters, but hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony, it’s still called “less than 12 rains”. If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination in spring, and has 12 full springs, but hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony, it’s still called “less than 12 rains”. If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination during the first rains retreat, and hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony of the first rains, it’s still called “less than 12 rains”. If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination during the second rains retreat, and hasn’t yet been through (that year’s) invitation (pavāraṇā) ceremony of the second rains, it’s still called “less than 12 rains”.
If a bhikkhunī has 12 full rains, but has less than 12 years, it’s called “12 full rains”. If a bhikkhunī has 12 full rains and 12 full years, or more than 12 years, it’s called “12 full rains”. If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination in winter, and been through the invitation ceremony at the end of (that year’s) rains retreat, this is called “12 full rains”. If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination in spring, and been through the invitation ceremony at the end of (that year’s) rains retreat; if a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination during the first rains, and been through the invitation ceremony at the end of (that year’s) first rains retreat; if a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination during the second rains, and been through the invitation ceremony at the end of (that year’s) second rains retreat; these are called “12 full rains”. If a bhikkhunī takes on a student, or gives the full ordination, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī of less than 12 rains gives the going forth to someone, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she gives the full ordination, it’s a pācittiya. If a bhikkhu of less than 12 rains gives the going forth or the full ordination to someone, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.