MgVb_ss10


Origin Story

佛住舍衛城。爾時迦梨比丘尼於聚落中遊行。去後有依止弟子。僧與作舉羯磨。師還弟子白言。僧與我作舉羯磨。不共法食味食。即呵言汝且默然。但使僧集即便集僧。諸比丘尼各作是念。是比丘尼行還集僧。常喜有施物。我等今日當得何物。皆喜速集。集已即作是唱
The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Kālī bhikkhunī was wandering among villages. After she had left, the sangha carried out an act of suspension against the student depending on her. When the teacher returned, the student told her: “The sangha has carried out an act of suspension against me. I may not take dhamma nourishment or material nourishment together with them.” Then (Kālī) criticized them, and said: “Be quiet. I’ll just have the sangha assemble.” Then she assembled the sangha. All the bhikkhunīs thought: “This bhikkhunī has returned from wandering and assembles the sangha. Usually there is happiness and offerings. What gift will we receive today?” All were happy and assembled quickly. When they had assembled, (Kālī) called out:


Saṅghakamma

阿梨耶僧聽。某甲比丘尼僧作舉羯磨。若僧時到。僧與某甲比丘尼捨舉羯磨。如是白。阿梨耶僧聽某甲比丘尼僧與作舉羯磨。僧今與某甲比丘尼捨舉羯磨。阿梨耶僧忍與某甲比丘尼捨舉羯磨者默然。若不忍者便說。是第一羯磨如是三羯磨。
“May the noble sangha listen. The sangha has carried out an act of suspension against bhikkhunī So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha lift the act of suspension against bhikkhunī So-and so. This is the motion. May the noble sangha listen. The sangha has carried out an act of suspension against bhikkhunī So-and-so. The sangha now lifts the act of suspension against bhikkhunī So-and so. If the noble sangha accepts to lift the act of suspension against bhikkhunī So-and-so, you should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” Likewise three announcements. 


Origin Story (continued)

諸比丘尼見此比丘尼眼目可畏。無敢遮者。諸比丘尼展轉相謂。此是何語。皆言我亦不知此語。
諸比丘尼白大愛道。大愛道以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已佛問。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何知比丘尼僧如法比尼作舉羯磨未行隨順未作如法先不語僧自捨羯磨。從今日後不聽。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
The bhikkhunīs saw that this bhikkhunī’s eyes were frightening. They didn’t dare to stop her. They said to each other: “What is she talking about?” They all replied: “I also don’t know.”
The bhikkhunīs informed Mahāpajāpatī, and she for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you, when you knew that the bhikkhunī sangha had carried out an act of suspension according to dhamma and vinaya against someone who hasn’t yet behaved appropriately, who hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma, without first speaking with the sangha, lift the formal act yourself? From now on, it’s no longer allowed.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:


Final Ruling

若比丘尼知比丘尼僧和合如法比尼作舉羯磨。未作如法先不語僧自與捨。是法初罪僧伽婆尸沙。
If a bhikkhunī knows that the bhikkhunī sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension according to dhamma and vinaya (against someone) who hasn’t yet acted according to dhamma, and she herself lifts it, without first speaking with the sangha, it’s an immediate saṅghādisesa offense.”


Explanation

比丘尼者如上說。知者。若自知若從他聞。和合者。非別眾。如法比尼者。不見罪不作三見。不捨舉羯磨者。不共住。未作如法者。未行隨順心未調伏。僧未與捨先不語者。僧中未作求聽羯磨而自僧中捨。是法初罪僧伽婆尸沙。僧伽婆尸沙者如上說。若弟子僧和合作舉羯磨者。若和上尼阿闍梨尼。應至長老比丘尼所作是言。誰無愚癡恒無有過。慧心常存不知故爾。更不復作。如是遍語諸人已令心柔軟。然後於僧中作求聽羯磨。當作是說。
“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Knowing” means she either knows herself or hears it from others. “In harmony” means an undivided asssembly. “According to dhamma and vinaya” means for not seeing an offense, for not clearing it, or for not giving up the three wrong views. “An act of suspension” means she can’t live in community. “Not yet acted according to dhamma” means she hasn’t yet behaved appropriately, and her mind hasn’t yet been corrected, and the sangha hasn’t yet lifted the suspension. “Without first speaking” means one hasn’t yet carried out the formal act to request permission<note: Pāli: apalokana-kamma.> in the midst of the sangha, and lifts it oneself in the midst of the sangha. This rule is an immediate saṅghādisesa offense. “A saṅghādisesa” is as explained above. If the sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension against one’s student, her preceptor or teacher should go to the senior bhikkhunī and say: “Who is without foolishness and never transgresses a rule? Now wisdom is established in her mind. She did this unknowingly. She won’t do it again.” Like this, they should speak to everyone to soften people’s minds. Afterwards, they should carry out the formal act to request permission in the midst of the sangha. They should speak like this:


Saṅghakamma

阿梨耶僧聽。某甲比丘尼有是事故僧作舉羯磨彼行隨順心柔軟捨。若僧時到。僧某甲欲從僧乞捨舉羯磨。諸阿梨耶聽。某甲欲從僧乞捨舉羯磨。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。然後應乞。
“May the noble sangha listen. The sangha has carried out an act of suspension against bhikkhunī So-and-so for this reason. She has behaved appropriately, her mind has been softened, and she has given up (the wrong behavior). If the right time has come for the sangha, So-and-so wants to ask the sangha to lift the act of suspension. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so wants to ask the sangha to lift the act of suspension. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” Afterwards, she should ask.


Explanation (continued)

若有人遮者。和上應軟語令止。若比丘尼知僧和合如法比尼作舉羯磨。而自捨者。得越比尼罪。
If someone blocks it, the precepter should speak with her in gentle words to make her stop. If a bhikkhu(nī)<note: The text says “bhikkhunī” but it seems to be a typo.> knows that the sangha in harmony has carried out an act of suspension according to dhamma and vinaya, and he himself lifts it, he breaks a minor vinaya rule.