MgVb_pj6




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住毘舍離。諸天世人恭敬供養。廣說如上。爾時賴吒波羅比丘尼。授離車童子經。乃至說。餘出家人著袈裟者。我尚不生此心。而況是師所尊重者。比丘尼言。若不爾者。近我住共語。捉我手捉我衣。來歡喜請坐。曲身就共期行。彼答言。但如是者可爾。如是適意已數數不止。如世尊說。念色不忘染污心起。如女憶男男憶女。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying in Vesālī, where he was venerated by and received offerings from gods and humans. As explained in detail above. At that time, Rāṣṭrapālā bhikkhunī was teaching a son of a Licchavi family the suttas. … He said: “Even towards other renunciates who wear monastic robes, I don’t give rise to such mindstates. How much less then towards the teacher whom I respect so much?” The bhikkhunī said: “If you don’t do it, then stay close to me, talk with me, hold my hand, and hold my robes. When you come I’m happy and will ask you to sit down. We’ll turn our bodies towards each other, and arrange walks together.” He answered: “Just that is fine.” When they had obtained enjoyment in this way, they did it again and again without stopping. As the World-honored One said: “When we think about the body, don’t forget that a defiled mind arises, such as a woman thinking about men, or a man thinking about women.” 


<lzh>諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。呼賴吒波羅比丘尼來。來已佛具問上事。汝實爾作是事不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何漏心。漏心男子邊申手內住乃至共期。從今已後。不聽漏心漏心男子邊申手內住乃至共期。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止毘舍離比丘尼皆悉令集。以十利故與諸比丘尼制戒。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and for this reason, she went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon Rāṣṭrapālā bhikkhunī.” When she came, the Buddha fully asked her about the above matter: “Did you really do these things?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you with a defiled mind, stay within arm’s reach of a man with an defiled mind … make arrangements together? From now on it’s no longer allowed with a defiled mind to stay within arm’s reach of a man with an defiled mind … make arrangements together .” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Vesālī. For 10 benefits, I lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼漏心。與漏心男子申手內住共語。受捉手捉衣。來歡喜請坐。曲身就共期去。是比丘尼波羅夷。不應共住。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind stays within arm’s reach of a man with a defiled mind, talks with him, lets him hold her hand, hold her robes, is happy when he comes, asks him to sit down, turns her body, and goes to appointments with him, that bhikkhunī is pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。比丘尼漏心漏心男子者。二俱欲心。申手內住者。舒手所及處。語者共耳語受捉手者。若捉手若捉腕若大指若小指。若捉衣者。僧伽梨欝多羅僧安陀會僧祇支雨衣。來歡喜者。善來欣悅常數數來。請坐者。我已敷床褥可坐。曲身者。亞身往就。期去者。若店肆前園澤中若常行來處。是比丘尼。波羅夷不應共住。波羅夷者如上說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “A a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind and a man with a defiled mind” means both have a lustful mind. “Staying within arm’s reach” means the area where an extended hand can reach. “Talking” means whispering in the ear. “Letting him hold her hand” means he either holds her hand, her wrist, her thumb, or her fingers. “Holding her robes” means the saṅghāṭī, uttarāsaṅga, antaravāsaka, saṅkacchika, and rains (bathing) robe. “Happy when he comes” means she welcomes him, and rejoices when he comes often. “Asking him to sit down” means saying: “I’ve already laid out beds and mats for sitting.” “Turning her body” means leaning it towards his body. “Goes to appointments” means in front of the shops, at parks and ponds, or at places where people frequently go to. That bhikkhunī is pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community. “A pārājika” is as explained above.


<lzh>若比丘尼漏心。漏心男子申手內共語。受捉手捉衣。來歡喜請坐曲身共期去。是比丘尼波羅夷不應共住。如是不能男及女人偷蘭遮。比丘尼漏心男子不漏心亦波羅夷。不能男及女人偷蘭遮。比丘尼無漏心男子漏心偷蘭遮。不能男及女人越毘尼罪。俱無漏心越比尼罪。不能男及女人越比尼心悔。若比丘尼漏心漏心男子申手內住乃至共期去波羅夷。若一一次第犯八事波羅夷。若間犯滿者亦波羅夷。若犯一即悔偷蘭遮。悔已復犯。乃至第七偷蘭遮滿八者。波羅夷。是故說。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind is within arm’s reach of a man with an defiled mind, talks together with him, lets him hold her hand, hold her robes, is happy when he comes, asks him to sit down, turns her body, and arranges walks together, that bhikkhunī is pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community. If it’s with an impotent man or a woman, it’s a thullaccaya. If the bhikkhunī has a defiled mind and the man has an undefiled mind, it’s also a pārājika. If it’s an impotent man or a woman, it’s a thullaccaya. If the bhikkhunī has an undefiled mind and the man has a defiled mind, it’s a thullaccaya. If it’s an impotent man or a woman, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If both have undefiled minds, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If it’s an impotent man or a woman, she transgresses against vinaya and should mentally repent. If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind stays within arm’s reach of a man with an defiled mind, … and arranges walks together, it’s a pārājika. If she commits the eight things one by one in order, it’s a pārājika. If she commits all of them but not in order, it’s also a pārājika. If she commits one and then confesses, it’s a thullaccaya. If after the confession, she commits it again, then up to the seventh it’s a thullaccaya. When she has completed the eighth, it’s a pārājika. This is what was said.