MgVb_pc89




<beginh2>Origin Story<endh2>


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼到俗人家舍。稱說樹提比丘尼。賢善持戒精進。乃至威儀庠序左顧右視。著衣持鉢審諦安詳省於言語。天人供養。檀越見已生恭敬心。給施衣鉢飲食疾病湯藥。偷蘭難陀威儀不具足。著穿破垢衣。大腹乳脇露現。舉止卒暴多於言語。生不敬心不請與衣鉢飲食疾病湯藥。便作是言。我至檀越家稱歎樹提故得此供養。而樹提但道說我不好事故我不得供養。樹提言。阿梨耶。我不道說何故說。汝惡事。
諸比丘尼聞已語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何不審諦而便嫌責。此非法非律非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。佛言。從今已後。不得不審諦聞而嫌責他。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī went to a lay family, and praised the bhikkhunī Jetā: “She’s wise, keeps the precepts, makes persistent effort, … conducts herself with dignity when looking left and right, when wearing the robe and holding the bowl, speaking words that are true, serene, and have been carefully considered. Gods and humans make offerings to her. When supporters see her, respect arises in their minds and they offer robes, bowls, drinks, food, and tonics and medicines for the sick.” Thullanandā herself didn’t conduct herself properly, she wore torn and dirty robes that exposed her big belly, her breasts and her sides. Her manners were rough, and she talked much. People didn’t respect her, and didn’t invite her with offerings of robes, bowls, drinks, food, and tonics and medicines for the sick. Then she said: “Because I went to a supporter’s house, and praised Jetā, she receives these offerings. But because Jetā only speaks badly about me, I don’t receive offerings.” Jetā said: “Venerable, I didn’t say anything. Why should I say bad things about you?”
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you rebuke her without carefully investigating? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to rebuke someone without carefully investigating and listening to them.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<beginh2>Final Ruling<endh2>


<beginchinese>若比丘尼語比丘尼作是言。阿梨耶。共往某甲家。彼於後不忍。某甲比丘尼無因緣不審諦聞而呵責者。波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī says to another bhikkhunī: “Venerable, let’s go together to such-and-such a family,” and if afterwards she can’t stand that bhikkhunī, and groundlessly, without investigating carefully and listening to her, criticizes her, it’s a pācittiya.”




<beginh2>Explanation<endh2>


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如偷蘭難陀比丘尼。家者剎利家。婆羅門家。毘舍家。首陀家。後不忍者如樹提比丘尼。不忍事者九惱非處起瞋第十。無因緣者。不審諦聞後嫌責者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼不審諦聞而嫌責者波夜提。若比丘不審諦而呵責者越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” means someone like Thullanandā bhikkhunī. “Family” means an aristocratic family, a brahmin family, a merchant family, a worker family. “Cannot stand afterwards” means like Jetā bhikkhunī. “Things she can’t stand” means the nine irritations, with baselessly arisen anger as the tenth. “Groundlessly” means rebuking her without first investigating carefully and listening to her. This is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī without investigating carefully and listening, rebukes someone, it’s a pācittiya. If a bhikkhu without investigating carefully, criticizes someone, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.