MgVb_pc95




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住毘舍離。爾時迦梨比丘尼度梨車第三生女。與受學法已。捉戶鉤開他房戶。共俗人外道住。比丘尼嫌呵言。此人犯戒捉戶鉤開他房戶。共男子住。云何與受具足。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。喚迦梨來。來已問汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何知犯戒。捉戶鉤開他房戶。與外道共住。而與受具足。從今已後不聽犯戒而與受具足。佛告大愛道。依止比舍離比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Vesālī. At that time, Kālī bhikkhunī gave the going forth to a Licchavi woman who was the third child. After she had given her the training rules<note: i.e. she had become a sikkhamānā>, the woman took a door hook, opened the door to her room, and stayed together with lay people and non-Buddhist renunciates. <note: the Lokuttaravāda parallel has an additional sentence here that she received the full ordination.> The bhikkhunīs were upset and criticized her: “This person is breaking the precepts. She has taken the door hook, opened the door to her room, and stayed together with men. How can you give her the full ordination?”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she fully informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon Kālī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you, knowing that she has broken the precepts, taken a door hook, opened the door to her room, and stayed together with non-Buddhist renunciates, give her the full ordination? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to give the full ordination to someone who has broken the precepts.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Vesālī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼知他犯戒。捉戶鉤開他房戶。共男子住。與受具足者。波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī knows that someone has broken the precepts, taken a door hook, opened the door to her room, and stayed together with a man, and gives her the full ordination, it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。犯戒者戒不具足越戒。捉戶鉤開房者開他房戶。男子者俗人若外道出家人。共住者習近住。與受具足者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若共俗人外道習近住者。不聽與受具足。若能使此人梵行全者。當先離別然後與受具足。若比丘知沙彌犯戒與女人習近住。不更與出家而與受具足者。越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Broken the precepts” means not kept precepts fully, or transgressed precepts. “Taking a door hook and opening a room” means opening the door to her room. “A man” means lay people or non-Buddhist renunciates. “Staying together” means staying closely together. If someone gives her the full ordination, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If she stays closely together with lay people or non-Buddhist renunciates, it’s not allowed to give her the full ordination. If one is able to make her be fully celibate, one should first separate her, and later give her the full ordination. If a bhikkhu knows that a sāmaṇera has broken the precepts, and stayed closely together with a woman, if without giving him the going forth again, he gives him the higher ordination, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.