MgVb_np18


Origin Story

佛住舍衛城。爾時學戒尼語偷蘭難陀言。阿梨耶。與我受具足。偷蘭難陀言。汝與我衣當與汝受具足。即便與衣。後不與受具足。學戒尼言。與我受具足。如是經久。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已佛問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。乃至佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a sikkhamānā said to Thullanandā: “Venerable, give me the full ordination.” Thullanandā said: “Give me a robe, and I’ll give you the full ordination.” Then she immediately offered a robe. Afterwards, (Thullanandā) didn’t give the full ordination. The sikkhamānā said: “Give me the full ordination.” In this way, it went on for a long time.
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she then went to the World-honored One and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. … ” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:


Final Ruling

若比丘尼語式叉摩尼言。汝與我衣當與汝受具足。取衣已不與受具足者尼薩耆波夜提。
If a bhikkhunī says to a sikkhamānā: ‘Give me a robe, and I’ll give you the full ordination,’ and if she takes the robe but doesn’t give the full ordination, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya.”


Explanation

比丘尼者如上說。式叉摩尼者。受學戒。衣者七種衣如上說。復有衣名僧伽梨乃至雨浴衣。許受具足者。後自不與受。不使人受。尼薩耆波夜提。尼薩耆波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼取式叉摩尼衣。許與受具足。後應與受。若老病無力不能受者。應語餘人。汝取是衣與受具足。若前人不欲受還索衣者當還。若比丘許沙彌。不與受具足越比尼罪。是故世尊說。
“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “A sikkhamānā” means someone who has received the training precepts. “A robe” means the seven kinds of robes as explained above<note: This refers to the seven kinds of allowable robe material.>. Also, robes are the saṅghāṭī, … the rains bathing robe. If she agrees to give the full ordination, but later doesn’t give it herself, nor has others give it, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya. “A nissaggiya pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī takes the sikkhamānā’s robe and agrees to give her the full ordination, she later should give it. If she’s old, sick, or without strength, and can’t give it, she should say to someone else: “Take this robe and give her the full ordination.” If the sikkhamānā doesn’t want to receive (ordination from that bhikkhunī) and asks to have the robe returned, it should be returned. If a bhikkhu agrees to a sāmaṇera’s request and then doesn’t give the full ordination, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.