MgVb_pc139-140




<h2>Origin Story</h2>


<lzh>佛住舍衛城。爾時波斯匿王東園池。不禁比丘比丘尼入。爾時六群比丘尼往彼園中作世俗語話。大小便洟唾生草上。復以藕葉裹不淨放池水中。明旦波斯匿王與後宮夫人。共詣園池遊觀。時後宮人閉在深宮不出來久。始得一出遊戲熙怡喜勇競。各占顧生草。此是我許而往捉之污泥其手。詣水欲洗。復見水上有裹。便作是念。諸年少等聞我等出。必裹眾香以待我等。即往捉取而污其手。即往白王。此是何物不淨如是。王即呼守園人問。誰污此園。白言更無餘人。昨日六群比丘尼在中作浴人言戲而去。
諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。此是惡事。乃至已聞者當重聞。</lzh>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs were not forbidden from entering king Pasenadi’s eastern park and pond. Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs went to the park and had worldly conversations. They defecated, urinated, sneezed, and spat on the fresh grass. They also wrapped their impurities in lotus leaves and put them into the water of the pond. The next morning, king Pasenadi and the ladies of the inner palace went together to visit the park and the pond. At that time, the palace ladies had been confined to the inner palace without going out for a long time. So at the beginning, they were happy, thrilled, and excited to go on an outing and have fun. They all stood and looked around at the fresh grass. (They saw the leaf packages in the grass, and thought:) “This is for us,” and when they went and picked them up, their hands were soiled with mud. So they went to the water wanting to wash themselves. Again, they saw that there were packages on the water and they thought: “The young men heard that we’re going out. They must have made these packages of perfume to treat us.” Then they went and picked them up, and soiled their hands. They went and informed the king: “What kind of impure stuff is this?” The king summoned the park keeper and asked: “Who soiled this park?” He answered: “There weren’t any other people, (except) the group-of-six bhikkhunīs who yesterday had worldly conversations, played, and then left.”
For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




<h2>Final Ruling</h2>


<lzh>若比丘尼。生草上大小便波夜提。
若比丘尼。水中大小便波夜提。</lzh>

If a bhikkhunī defecates or urinates on fresh grass, it’s a pācittiya.
If a bhikkhunī defecates or urinates in water, it’s a pācittiya.”




<h2>Explanation</h2>


<lzh>比丘尼者如上說。草者一切草。大小便洟唾波夜提。若雨時生草覆地者。當在無草處行。若無空處者。當在瓦塼上乾草木牛馬屎上人行處。若復無者。下至一木枝。令先墮木枝後墮草上。若經行處有草者。當於經行頭安唾壺。是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Grass” means all kinds of grass. Defecating, urinating, snotting, and spitting is a pācittiya. If during the rainy season fresh grass covers the ground, one should go to a place without grass. If there are no empty places, one should do it on clay tiles, dry vegetation, cow or horse dung, or where people are passing. If there are also no such places, one should even just do it on a wooden branch: One should first let it fall on the wooden branch, and then on the grass. If there is grass on one’s walking meditation path, one should set up a spittoon at the beginning of the walking path. This is what the World-honored One said.


<lzh>比丘尼如上說。水者有十種如上說。若水中大小便洟唾波夜提。若雨時水漫溢者當於高處。大小便。若無是者。當於瓦石乾草木上牛馬屎上。若復無者。當以草木枝承令先墮木枝後墮水中。若掘廁下有水出者。不得先於中大小便。先令淨人行。然後比丘尼行。若廁下有流水者。當安板木。令先墮板上後墮水中。若船上行時有廁處者。當安板木承。令墮板上後墮水中。若無板者。以木枝承令先墮木枝上後墮水中。是故世尊說。</lzh>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Water” means the 10 kinds as explained above. Defecating, urinating, snotting, and spitting in water is a pācittiya. If during the rainy season, there is flooding, she should defecate and urinate in a high place. If there aren’t any, she should do it on clay, stone, dry vegetation, or cow or horse dung. If there are also no such places, she should take a grass blade or a wooden branch: She should first let it fall on the wooden branch, and then into the water. If she digs a toilet and water comes out under it, it’s not allowable to defecate and urinate there first. One should first have an attendent go there, and later the bhikkhunī may go. If there is flowing water under the toilet, she should install a wooden board, to make it first fall on the board and later into the water. If she’s on a boat and has to go, if there is a toilet place, she should take a wooden board to make it fall on the board and later into the water. If there is no board, she should take a wooden branch and first let it fall on the branch and later into the water. This is what the World-honored One said.