MgVb_ss6




First Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住王舍城。王舍城中有人名羯暮子。取得羯暮女為婦。端正少雙。持食與夫。世尊到時著入聚落衣。持鉢入城次行乞食到其家。時婦作是念。若我夫見佛者。必當起看妨廢飲食當戶而立。於佛有緣。世尊即放光明照其舍內。其夫(𨶳)［門@視］看。見佛便語婦言。汝大不善但欲減損於我。其婦言。我非欲相損。我畏見世尊已妨廢食耳。其夫瞋言。女人情淺。欲少饒益而傷損不少。婦語夫言。大家郎聽我出家。夫語婦言。欲何道出家。婦言。佛法出家。夫言相聽。即往優鉢羅比丘尼所求出家。即度出家受具足。初夜後夜精勤不懈。至八日得盡有漏。自知作證三明六通心得自在依樹下坐。時釋提桓因往到其所。即說頌曰。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Rājagaha. In Rājagaha, there was a man called Kammāra-putta (the smith’s son) who took Kammāra-dhītā (the smith’s daughter) as his wife. They were a graceful and young couple. She served food to her husband. At the right time, the World-honored One put on his robes for entering the village, took his bowl, entered the city on continuous almsround, and came to their house. The wife thought: “If my husband sees the Buddha, he’ll surely get up to look at him, which will interfere with his meal and drinks. I’ll stand in the door.” But he had a karmic connection with the Buddha. Then the World-honored One emitted a brilliant light to illuminate the inside of their house. The husband looked up. When he saw the Buddha, he immediately told his wife: “You’re greatly unvirtuous, and you only wish for my decline.” His wife said: “I don’t wish to harm you. I just feared that when you saw the World-honored One, it’d interfere with your meal.” Her husband said angrily: “Women’s feelings are so shallow. Wishing for a small benefit, you caused no small harm.” The wife said to the husband: “Young man of a great family, allow me to go forth.” The husband asked the wife: “In which renunciate movement do you want to go forth?” The wife said: “I want to go forth in the Buddha’s dhamma.” The husband said: “I’ll allow you.” Then she went to Uppala(vaṇṇā) bhikkhunī and requested the going forth. She received the going forth and the full ordination. In the first and last parts of the night she practised diligently without negligence, and on the eighth day, she attained the ending of all taints. She knew for herself that she had realized awakening, the threefold knowledge, the six higher knowledges, and liberation of the mind, by sitting under a tree. Then Sakka, the king of gods, came to her and spoke these verses:


<beginchinese>帝釋天營從 來下稽首足
觀是羯暮女 出家始八日
優鉢善比丘 漏盡證六通
所作已成辦 德力心自在
折伏諸情根 閉目樹下坐
是故今稽首 世間良福田<endchinese>

King Sakka and his retinue came down to pay respect with their heads at your feet,
To see this Kammāra-dhītā who went forth eight days ago
Under Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī, her taints ended, awakened, with the six knowledges,
She has accomplished what was to be done, by the power of merit, her mind is liberated,
She subdued the roots of passion, sitting under a tree with eyes closed.
Therefore, we now pay respect to you, field of merit for the world.


<beginchinese>此比丘尼有好清聲。善能讚唄。有優婆塞請去。唄已心大歡喜。即施與大張好(㲲)［疊＊毛］。時諸天於虛空中。而說頌曰。<endchinese>

The bhikkhunī had a beautiful, clear voice, and was able to recite verses of praise of the Buddha. Lay-buddhists invited her to come. When she recited, their minds were overjoyed, and they offered her a large piece of good cotton. Then the gods in the heavens spoke these verses:


<beginchinese>今汝得善利 福德甚巍巍
一切染著盡 清淨奉施衣
今王舍城中 清信諸士女
何不來勸請 微妙善法音
親近能離苦 不請則不說
聞已如修習 則致勝妙處<endchinese>

Now you obtained a good gift, its merits are deep and lofty,
With all defilements ended, you received this robe-offering in purity.
Now, women of Rājagaha with clear faith, 
Why don’t you invite her to come and teach you, with the sound of the subtle, marvelous dhamma?
Those familiar with it can overcome suffering, but if you don’t invite her, she won’t speak.
Having heard it, and practising accordingly, you can reach the most sublime place.


<beginchinese>是時諸人家家請唄。聞歡喜已大得利養。諸比丘尼各生嫉心。便作是言。此妖艷歌頌惑亂眾心。
諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實作世間歌頌耶。答言。我不知世間歌頌。佛言。是比丘尼非世間歌頌。<endchinese>

At that time, people from many families invited her to recite. When they heard her and were happy, she received many offerings. Jealousy arose in the minds of the other bhikkhunīs, and they said: “These seductive songs and verses confuse the minds of the people.” 
For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really create worldly songs and verses?” She answered: “I don’t know any worldly songs and verses.” The Buddha said: “This bhikkhunī doesn’t sing worldly songs and verses.




Past Life Story


<beginchinese>過去世時有波羅奈城王名吉利。有七女。一名沙門。二名沙門友。三名比丘尼。四名比丘尼婢。五名達摩支。六名須達摩七名僧婢。於迦葉佛前發願。如七女經中廣說。<endchinese>

In the past, there was a king in the city of Vārāṇasī called Kikī, who had seven daughters. The first was called Samaṇā, the second Samaṇamittā, the third Bhikkhunī, the fourth Bhikkhunīdāsī, the fifth Dhammamittā, the sixth Sudhammā, and the seventh Saṅghadāsī. They made a vow in the presence of Kassapa Buddha. To be explained in detail as in the sutta about the seven daughters.




First Origin Story (continued)


<beginchinese>時比丘尼人復將去離眾獨宿。有比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實離眾獨宿不。答言實爾。佛言。<endchinese>

Then people again made the bhikkhunī come, and she spent a night alone away from the group. A bhikkhunī told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went and informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really spend a night alone away from the group?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said:




First Preliminary Ruling


<beginchinese>從今日不聽離眾獨宿。<endchinese>

“From now on, it’s no longer allowed to spend a night alone away from the group.”




Second Origin Story


<beginchinese>復次流離王罰迦維羅衛國。應廣說。爾時諸比丘尼城外獨宿。乃至<endchinese>

At another time, king Viḍūḍabha punished Kapilavatthu. Should be explained in detail. At that time, the bhikkhunīs spent a night alone outside the city. …




Second Preliminary Ruling


<beginchinese>除王難。<endchinese>

“Unless there is trouble caused by kings.”




Third Origin Story


<beginchinese>復次爾時諸比丘尼著道行。老病不及伴獨宿。心生疑悔問大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。不欲無罪。佛語大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

At another time, the bhikkhunīs were walking on a road. An old and sick (bhikkhunī) couldn’t reach her companions and spent a night alone. Doubts and remorse arose in her mind, and she asked Mahāpajāpatī. Mahāpajāpatī then went and informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “If she didn’t want it, there is no offense.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼離比丘尼一夜宿除餘時。餘時者。若病時賊亂圍城時。是名餘時。是法初罪。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī spends a night away from other bhikkhunīs, except at a suitable time, —a suitable time means: if she’s sick, or if the city is surrounded by criminals and rebels. This is called a suitable time,— it’s an immediate (saṅghādisesa) offense.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。一夜宿者。日未沒至明相出。除餘時者。不欲離宿老羸病賊亂圍城。若城內不得出。城外不得入。是名餘時。是法初罪僧伽婆尸沙。僧伽婆尸沙者如上說。若比丘尼離比丘尼宿。日未沒至明相出。僧伽婆尸沙。日沒以離至明相出。偷蘭遮。若比丘尼僧伽藍中共房宿。當相去一申手內。一夜中當三以手相尋看。不得一時頓三。當初夜一中夜一後夜一。初夜不尋看越比尼罪。中夜不尋看亦越比尼罪。後夜不尋看亦越比尼罪。一切時看無罪。若上閣下閣異宿者。一夜當三過往。如是僧伽藍中宿偷蘭遮。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Spending a night” means from before sunset to dawn. “Except at a suitable time” means if she didn’t want to spend a night away, if she’s old, weak, or sick, or if the city is surrounded by criminals and rebels, and she’s either in the city and can’t leave, or outside the city and can’t enter. This is called a suitable time. This is an immediate saṅghādisesa offense. “A saṅghādisesa” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī spends a night away from other bhikkhunīs, from before sunset to dawn, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If she leaves them from after sunset to dawn, it’s a thullaccaya. If bhikkhunīs spend the night in a shared room in a monastery, they should be within arm’s reach of each other. In the night, they should check on each other three times with the hand. It’s not allowed to check three times in one go. They should do it once in the first watch of the night, once in the middle watch, and once in the last watch. If a bhikkhunī doesn’t check in the first watch, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she doesn’t check in the middle watch, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she doesn’t check in the last watch, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she checks at all times, there is no offense. If one spends the night on an upper level of a sleeping platform, and the other spends it on a lower level, they should go to each other three times per night. In this way, they should spend the night in a monastery. (If they don’t,) it’s a thullaccaya. This is what the World-honored One said.