MiVb_ss14


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時修休摩比丘尼、婆頗比丘尼，共作惡行，有惡名聲，更相覆罪，觸惱眾僧。諸比丘尼語言：「汝等作惡行，有惡名聲。汝相遠離，捨是作惡觸惱僧事，於佛法中增廣，得安樂住！」二比丘尼言：「我等不作惡行，無惡名聲，亦不觸惱眾僧。此中有餘二比丘尼，共作惡行，有惡名聲，觸惱眾僧。」諸比丘尼言：「汝等莫作是語！何以故？此中無有餘二比丘尼作惡惱僧，唯有汝等。可相遠離，捨是作惡觸惱僧事，於佛法中增廣，得安樂住！」如是諫，堅持不捨，</lzh>
At that time, Xiuxiumo bhikkhunī and Popo bhikkhunī engaged in unwholesome conduct together, had a bad reputation, covered up each other’s offenses, and irritated the sangha. The bhikkhunīs said: “You engage in unwholesome conduct and have a bad reputation. Live apart from each other, and give up this matter of practising the unwholesome and irritating the sangha. You’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma and live comfortably.” The two bhikkhunīs said: “We don’t engage in unwholesome conduct, there’s no bad reputation, and we also don’t irritate the sangha. There are two other bhikkhunīs here who engage in unwholesome conduct together, have a bad reputation, and irritate the sangha.” The bhikkhunīs said: “Don’t say this! Why? There are no other two bhikkhunīs here who practise the unwholesome and irritate the sangha, only you. Please live apart from each other, and give up this matter of practising the unwholesome and irritating the sangha. You’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma and live comfortably.” When they were admonished like this, they held firmly on to it and didn’t give it up.
<lzh>諸比丘尼以事白佛。佛以是事集二部僧，問彼二比丘尼：「汝等實爾不？」答言：「實爾。世尊！」佛種種呵責已，告諸比丘：「應令一比丘尼，與彼二比丘尼親善者，往屏處諫。若受者善；若不受，應眾多比丘尼往諫，若受者善；若不受，應比丘尼僧往諫。」諸比丘受教，即勅諸比丘尼往諫，三返皆不受。諸長老比丘尼種種呵責，以事白佛。佛以是事集二部僧，種種遙訶責彼二比丘尼已，告諸比丘：「今為諸比丘尼結戒，從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>
The bhikkhunīs told the Buddha of this matter. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter and asked these two bhikkhunīs: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this, World-honored One.” When the Buddha had criticized them in all kinds of ways, he told the bhikkhus: “They should have one bhikkhunī, who is friends with these two bhikkhunīs, go to a secluded place and admonish them. If they accept it, it’s fine. If they don’t accept it, a group of bhikkhunīs should go and admonish them. If they accept it, it’s fine. If they don’t accept it, the bhikkhunī sangha should go and admonish them.” The bhikkhus received the instruction and then told the bhikkhunīs to go and admonish them. They went three times, but each time they didn’t accept it. The senior bhikkhunīs criticized them in all kinds of ways, and told the Buddha of this matter. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter and when he had criticized these two bhikkhunīs in all kinds of ways from afar, he told the bhikkhus: “I now lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus:


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>「若二比丘尼，共作惡行，有惡名聲，更相覆罪，觸惱眾僧。諸比丘尼語言：『汝二比丘尼作惡行，有惡名聲，更相覆罪，觸惱眾僧。汝相遠離，捨是作惡觸惱僧事，於佛法中增廣，得安樂住！』彼二比丘尼言：『我等不作惡行，無惡名聲，不相覆罪，不觸惱僧。此中有餘二比丘尼，共作惡行，觸惱眾僧。』諸比丘尼復語言：『莫作是語！何以故？此中更無餘二比丘尼作惡惱僧，唯有汝等。可相遠離，捨是作惡，觸惱僧事，於佛法中增廣，得安樂住！』如是諫，堅持不捨，應第二、第三諫。第二、第三諫，捨是事善；不捨者，是比丘尼三諫，犯僧伽婆尸沙，可悔過。」</lzh>
‘If two bhikkhunīs engage in unwholesome conduct together, have a bad reputation, cover up each other’s offenses, and irritate the sangha, the bhikkhunīs should say: “You two bhikkhunīs engage in unwholesome conduct, have a bad reputation, cover up each other’s offenses, and irritate the sangha. Live apart from each other, and give up this matter of practising the unwholesome and irritating the sangha. You’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma and live comfortably.” If these two bhikkhunīs say: “We don’t engage in unwholesome conduct, there’s no bad reputation, we don’t cover up each other’s offenses, and don’t irritate the sangha. There are two other bhikkhunīs here who engage in unwholesome conduct together, and irritate the sangha,” the bhikkhunīs should say again: “Don’t say this. Why? There are no other two bhikkhunīs here who practise the unwholesome and irritate the sangha, only you. Please live apart from each other, and give up this matter of practising the unwholesome and irritating the sangha. You’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma and live comfortably.” If they, when admonished like this, hold firmly on to it and don’t give it up, they should admonish them a second and a third time. If they give up this matter at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, those bhikkhunīs commit a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments, from which one can repent.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>更相覆罪者：若僧伽婆尸沙、若偷羅遮、若波逸提、若波羅提提舍尼、若突吉羅、若不護口。</lzh>
“Covering up each other’s offenses” means saṅghādisesas, thullaccayas, pācittiyas, pātidesanīyas, dukkaṭas, or unguarded speech.

<lzh>惱僧者：若布薩、若自恣、若諸羯磨，皆如調達破僧中說。</lzh>
“Irritating the sangha” means at the uposatha, the invitation ceremony, or formal acts, all as explained in “Devadatta splits the sangha”.

<lzh>式叉摩那、沙彌尼，突吉羅。</lzh>
For a sikkhamānā and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa.
