MiVb_ss13


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>優波離又問：「世尊已為諸比丘結戒：『若比丘，依聚落住，行惡行、污他家，乃至僧伽婆尸沙。』我當云何持？」佛言：「當作二部僧持。從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>
Upāli asked again: “The World-honored One has laid down the precept for the bhikkhus: ‘If a bhikkhu lives supported by a village, engages in unwholesome conduct and corrupts families, … it’s a saṅghādisesa.’ How should I remember this?” The Buddha said: “You should remember it as to be practised by both sanghas. From now on, this precept should be recited thus:


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>「若比丘尼，依聚落住，行惡行、污他家。行惡行，皆見聞知；污他家，亦見聞知。諸比丘尼語是比丘尼：『汝行惡行、污他家。行惡行，皆見聞知；污他家，亦見聞知。汝出去，不應是中住！』彼比丘尼言：『諸阿姨隨愛恚癡畏。何以故？有如是等同罪比丘尼，有驅者、有不驅者。』諸比丘尼復語言：『汝莫作是語：「諸阿姨隨愛恚癡畏，有如是等同罪比丘尼，有驅者、有不驅者。」汝行惡行、污他家。行惡行，皆見聞知；污他家，亦見聞知，汝捨是隨愛恚癡畏語。汝出去，不應是中住。』如是諫，堅持不捨，應第二、第三諫。第二、第三諫，捨是事善；不捨者，是比丘尼三諫，犯僧伽婆尸沙，可悔過。」</lzh>
‘If a bhikkhunī lives supported by a village, engages in unwholesome conduct and corrupts families, and all of her unwholesome conduct is seen and heard and known, and the corrupted families are also seen and heard and known, the bhikkhunīs should address that bhikkhunī: “You engage in unwholesome conduct and corrupt families. All of your unwholesome conduct is seen and heard and known, and the corrupted families are also seen and heard and known. Go away, you shouldn’t live among us!” If that bhikkhunī says: “The venerables follow desire, anger, delusion, and fear. Why? There are also other bhikkhunīs with the same offense. Some of them are expelled, some aren’t expelled,” the bhikkhunīs should say again: “Don’t say: ‘The venerables follow desire, anger, delusion, and fear. Why? There are also other bhikkhunīs with the same offense. Some of them are expelled, some aren’t expelled.’ You engage in unwholesome conduct and corrupt families. All of your unwholesome conduct is seen and heard and known, and the corrupted families are also seen and heard and known. You should give up this speech about following desire, anger, delusion, and fear. Go away, you shouldn’t live among us!” If she, when admonished like this, holds firmly on to it and doesn’t give it up, they should admonish her a second and a third time. If she gives up this matter at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments, from which one can repent.’”