MgVb_ss15




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼有鬪諍事。僧如法比尼。與作羯磨。羯磨竟瞋恚以非理謗僧。而作是言。阿梨耶僧。隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡。僧依愛依瞋依怖依癡。是故呵責此非法斷事。是比丘尼。諸比丘尼諫言。阿梨耶。莫作非理謗僧。僧不隨愛不隨瞋不隨怖不隨癡。僧不依愛瞋怖癡非法斷事。如是第二第三諫不止。諸比丘尼以是因緣語大愛道。大愛道以是事往白世尊。佛言。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī created conflicts, and the sangha carried out a formal act according to dhamma and vinaya against her. When the formal act was finished, she resentfully and unreasonably slandered the sangha, and said: “The noble sangha follows desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha is relying on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. For this reason they criticize me. This matter isn’t settled according to dhamma.” The bhikkhunīs admonished her: “Venerable, don’t slander the sangha unreasonably. The sangha doesn’t follow desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha doesn’t rely on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion to settle this matter not in accordance with dhamma.” When she was admonished like this a second and a third time, she didn’t stop. For this reason, the bhikkhunīs spoke with Mahāpajāpatī, and she went and informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: 




Preliminary Ruling


<beginchinese>汝去應屏處三諫多人中三諫僧中三諫。令捨此事。屏處諫者。屏處應問。汝實瞋恚非理謗僧。僧隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡。僧依愛依瞋依怖依癡耶。答言實爾。屏處應諫言。汝莫瞋恚非理謗僧。僧不隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡。僧不依愛瞋怖癡非理斷事。我今慈心諫汝。欲饒益故。一諫已過二諫在。捨是事不。答言不捨。如是第二第三諫。多人中亦如是。僧中應作求聽羯磨。<endchinese>

“You should go and admonish her three times in a secluded place, three times among a few people, and three times within the sangha to make her give up this matter. “Admonishing in a secluded place” means that you should ask in a secluded place: ‘Did you really resentfully and unreasonably slander the sangha: “The sangha follows desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha is relying on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion?”’ If she answers: ‘I really said this,’ then you should admonish her in a secluded place: ‘Don’t slander the sangha resentfully and unreasonably. The sangha doesn’t follow desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha doesn’t rely on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion to settle this matter not in accordance with dhamma. I now admonish you out of compassion, wanting to benefit you. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give up this matter?’ If she answers: ‘I don’t give it up,’ she should be admonished like this a second and third time. “Among a few people” is also like this. “Within the sangha,” you should carry out a formal act to request permission:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。偷蘭難陀比丘尼瞋恚非理謗僧。隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡。僧依愛瞋怖癡。已屏處三諫已多人中三諫。令捨此事而不捨。若僧時到。僧今亦應三諫。<endchinese>

‘May the noble sangha listen. Thullanandā bhikkhunī has slandered the sangha resentfully and unreasonably: “The sangha follows desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha is relying on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion.” She has been admonished three times in a secluded place and three times among a few people to make her give up this matter, but she hasn’t given it up. If the right time has come for the sangha, the sangha should now also admonish her three times.’




Preliminary Ruling (continued)


<beginchinese>僧中應問。汝實瞋恚非理謗僧隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡乃至非法斷事。已屏處三諫多人中三諫而不捨耶。答言實爾。僧中應諫言。汝莫瞋恚非理謗僧。僧不隨愛不隨瞋不隨怖不隨癡。乃至非理斷事。僧今慈心諫汝。欲饒益故。當取僧語。一諫已過二諫在。捨是事不。答言不捨。第二第三諫猶故不捨。<endchinese>

Within the sangha you should ask: ‘Did you really resentfully and unreasonably slander the sangha: “The sangha follows desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. … this matter isn’t settled according to dhamma?” And having been admonished three times in a secluded place and three times among a few people, you haven’t given it up?’ If she answers: ‘I really did this,’ the sangha should admonish her: ‘Don’t slander the sangha resentfully and unreasonably. The sangha doesn’t follow desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. … to settle this matter not in accordance with dhamma. The sangha now admonishes you out of compassion, wanting to benefit you. One admonishment is over, two remain. Do you give up this matter?’ If she answers: ‘I don’t give it up,’ she should be admonished like this a second and third time.” She still didn’t give it up.




Origin Story (continued)


<beginchinese>諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已佛具問上事。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛語偷蘭難陀。此是惡事。汝常不聞我無量方便呵責佷戾稱歎軟語耶。汝云何佷戾。此非法非律非如佛教。不可以是長養善法。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, the Buddha fully asked her about the above matter: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “Thullanandā, this is an unwholesome thing. Have you not often heard me with countless skillful means criticize contrary speech and praise gentle speech? Why did you speak contrarily? This is against the dhamma, against the vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching. One can’t develop in wholesome states like this.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼瞋恚非理謗僧作是言。僧隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡。僧依愛瞋怖癡。是故呵責。是比丘尼。諸比丘尼應諫作是言。阿梨耶。莫作是語。僧隨愛隨瞋隨怖隨癡僧依愛瞋怖癡。何以故。僧不隨愛瞋怖癡。汝莫瞋恚非理謗僧。是比丘尼。諸比丘尼諫時。堅持不捨者。應第二第三諫。捨是事善。若不捨是法乃至三諫。僧伽婆尸沙。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī resentfully and unreasonably slanders the sangha, saying: ‘The sangha follows desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha is relying on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. For this reason they criticize me,’ the bhikkhunīs should admonish her: ‘Venerable, don’t say: “The sangha follows desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. The sangha is relying on desire, aversion, fear, and delusion.” Why? The sangha doesn’t follow desire, aversion, fear, and delusion. Don’t resentfully and unreasonably slander the sangha.’ If that bhikkhunī when admonished by the bhikkhunīs persists firmly, and doesn’t give it up, she should be admonished a second and a third time. If she gives up this matter, it’s fine. If not, this rule is a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如偷蘭難陀比丘尼。瞋恚非理謗僧。屏處三諫不捨者。諫諫越比尼罪。多人中亦爾。僧中初諫時亦越比尼罪。諫竟偷蘭遮。第二初諫時亦越比尼罪。諫竟偷蘭遮。第三初諫時偷蘭遮。諫竟僧伽婆尸沙。成僧伽婆尸沙已。屏處多人中僧中。一切越比尼罪偷蘭遮。除八謗僧偷蘭遮。餘一切合成一僧伽婆尸沙罪治。若中間止者。隨止處治罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” means someone like Thullanandā bhikkhunī. If she resentfully and irrationally slanders the sangha, is admonished three times in a secluded place, and doesn’t give it up, for each admonishment she breaks a minor vinaya rule. Among a few people is also the same. Within the sangha, during the first admonishment, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the second admonishment, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. When the admonishment is over, it’s a thullaccaya. During the third admonishment, it’s a thullaccaya. When the admonishment is over, it’s a saṅghādisesa. When she has broken the saṅghādisesa, all minor vinaya breaches and thullaccayas from the secluded place, from among a few people, and from within the sangha—except for the eight thullaccayas for slandering the sangha—are cleared with the saṅghādisesa procedure. If she stops in between, then they should be dealt with according to the point where she stopped. This is what the World-honored One said.