DgKd

<lzh-fascicle-start>比丘尼揵度第十七</lzh-fascicle-start>
<en-fascicle-start>Bhikkhunī Khandhaka, no. 17.</en-fascicle-start>


<note>Numbering added to facilitate references to parallels.</note>


<h2>(DgKd01) Mahāpajāpatī’s story</h2>

<lzh>爾時世尊在釋翅瘦尼拘律園。時摩訶波闍波提與五百舍夷女人俱詣世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，白佛言：「善哉世尊！願聽女人於佛法中得出家為道。」佛言：「且止，瞿曇彌！莫作是言：『欲令女人出家為道。』何以故？瞿曇彌！若女人於佛法中出家為道，令佛法不久。」爾時摩訶波闍波提聞世尊教已，前禮佛足遶已而去。爾時世尊從釋翅瘦與千二百五十弟子人間遊行往拘薩羅國，從拘薩羅還至舍衛國祇桓精舍。時摩訶波闍波提聞佛在祇桓精舍，與五百舍夷女人俱共剃髮被袈裟，往舍衛國祇桓精舍，在門外立，步涉破脚塵土坌身涕泣流淚。</lzh>
At that time, the Blessed One was among the Sakyans in the Banyan tree park. Then Mahāpajāpatī, together with 500 Sakyan women, went to the World-honored One, paid respect with her head at his feet, stood at one side, and said to the Buddha: “It’d be good, World-honored One, if you please allowed women to obtain the going forth for the sake of the path in the Buddha’s dhamma.” The Buddha said: “Enough, Gotamī. Don’t say: ‘I wish to let women go forth for the sake of the path.’ Why? Gotamī, if women went forth for the sake of the path in the Buddha’s dhamma, it’d cause the Buddha’s dhamma not to last long.” When Mahāpajāpatī heard the World-honored One’s instruction, she paid respect at the Buddha’s feet, and having circumambulated him, she left. Then the World-honored One left the Sakyans with 1,250 students and went wandering among the people in the country of Kosala. In Kosala, he returned to Jeta’s grove monastery in Sāvatthī. When Mahāpajāpatī heard that the Buddha was in the Jeta’s grove monastery, she and the 500 Sakyan women shaved off their hair, put on monastic robes, and went to the Jeta’s grove monastery in Sāvatthī. They stood outside the gate, with feet cracked from the journey, their bodies covered in dust, and with tears streaming down. 

<lzh>爾時阿難見已即往問言：「瞿曇彌！何故與舍夷五百女人剃髮被袈裟，步涉破脚塵土坌身，在此涕泣流淚而立耶？」彼即答言：「我等女人，於佛法中不得出家受大戒。」阿難語言：「且止！我為汝往佛所求請。」</lzh>
At that time, Ānanda saw them, went there and asked: “Gotamī, Why have you and the 500 Sakyan women shaved your hair, put on monastic robes, and stand here with feet cracked from the journey, with your bodies covered in dust, and with tears streaming down?” She then answered: “We women don’t obtain the going forth and the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma.” Ānanda said: “Enough. I’ll go to the Buddha and ask him for you.”

<lzh>爾時阿難即至世尊所，頭面禮足却住一面，白佛言：「善哉世尊！願聽女人在佛法中出家受大戒。」佛告阿難：「且止！莫欲令女人於佛法中出家受大戒。何以故？若女人在佛法中出家受大戒，則令佛法不久。譬如阿難！有長者家男少女多，則知其家衰微。如是阿難！若女人在佛法中出家受大戒，則令佛法不久。又如好稻田而被霜雹即時破壞。如是阿難！若女人在佛法中出家受大戒，即令佛法不久。」阿難白佛言：「摩訶波闍波提於佛有大恩，佛母命過，乳養世尊長大。」佛語阿難：「如是！如是！於我有大恩，我母命過，乳養令我長大。</lzh>
Then Ānanda went to the Buddha, paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, stood at one side, and said to the Buddha: “It’d be good, World-honored One, if you please allowed women to go forth and receive the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma.” The Buddha said to Ānanda: “Enough. Don’t wish for women to go forth and receive the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma. Why? If women went forth and received the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma, it’d cause the Buddha’s dhamma not to last long. Ānanda, as in a lay family with few men and many women, one would know that that family will decline, so too, Ānanda, if women went forth and received the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma, it’d cause the Buddha’s dhamma not to last long. Or as a paddy field that’s affected by frost and hail would thus be destroyed, so too, Ānanda, if women went forth and received the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma, it’d cause the Buddha’s dhamma not to last long.” Ānanda said to the Buddha: “Mahāpajāpatī had great compassion for the Buddha. When the Buddha’s mother passed away, she breastfed and raised the World-honored One.” The Buddha said to Ānanda: “That’s true, that’s true. She had great compassion for me. When my mother passed away, she breastfed and raised me.

<lzh>我亦於摩訶波闍波提有大恩，若人因他得知佛法僧，此恩難報，非衣食、床、臥具、醫藥所能報恩。我出世令摩訶波闍波提知佛法僧亦如是。」佛告阿難：「若有人因他信佛法僧，此恩難報，非衣食、床、臥具、醫藥所能報恩。我出世令摩訶波闍波提信樂佛法僧亦如是。」佛語阿難：「若有人因他得歸依佛法僧，受持五戒，知苦知集知盡知道，於苦集盡道無有狐疑，若得須陀洹果斷諸惡趣，得決定入正道，七返生死便盡苦際。阿難！如是人恩難可報，非衣食、床、臥具、醫藥所能報恩。我出世令摩訶波闍波提受三自歸，乃至決定得入正道亦如是。」</lzh>
I also had great compassion for Mahāpajāpatī. If someone because of another attains knowledge of the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, this compassion is hard to repay. There are no robes, food, beds, bedding, or medicines that can repay this compassion. My appearance in the world caused Mahāpajāpatī to know the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha in this way.” The Buddha (also) said to Ānanda: “If someone because of another acquires faith in the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, this compassion is hard to repay. There are no robes, food, beds, bedding, or medicines that can repay this compassion. My appearance in the world caused Mahāpajāpatī to acquire joyous faith the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha in this way.” The Buddha (also) said to Ānanda: “If someone because of another is able to take refuge in the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, to keep the five precepts, to know suffering, the arising, the cessation, and the way, and has no doubt about suffering, the arising, the cessation, and the way, and if they attain the fruit of stream-entry, cut off the bad destinations, have firmly entered the true path, and will attain the cessation of suffering within a maximum of seven rounds of births and deaths, Ānanda, the compassion of such a person is hard to repay. There are no robes, food, beds, bedding, or medicines that can repay this compassion. My appearance in the world caused Mahāpajāpatī to receive the three refuges, … to firmly enter the true path in this way.”

<lzh>阿難白佛：「女人於佛法中出家受戒，可得須陀洹果乃至阿羅漢果不？」佛告阿難：「可得。」阿難白佛：「若女人於佛法中出家受大戒，得須陀洹果乃至阿羅漢果者，願佛聽出家受大戒。」</lzh>
Ānanda said to the Buddha: “If women went forth and received the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma, could they attain the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of arahantship?” The Buddha said to Ānanda: “They could attain it.” Ānanda said to the Buddha: “If women who go forth and receive the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma can attain the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of arahantship, may the Buddha allow them to go forth and receive the full ordination.” 


<h2>(DgKd02) Garudhammas</h2>

<lzh>佛告阿難：「今為女人制八盡形壽不可過法，若能行者即是受戒。何等八？雖百歲比丘尼見新受戒比丘，應起迎逆禮拜與敷淨座請令坐。如此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。阿難！比丘尼不應罵詈比丘呵責，不應誹謗言破戒破見破威儀。此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。阿難！比丘尼不應為比丘作舉、作憶念、作自言，不應遮他覓罪、遮說戒、遮自恣，比丘尼不應呵比丘，比丘應呵比丘尼。</lzh>
The Buddha said to Ānanda: “I now lay down eight rules for women that they can’t transgress for their whole life. If they can practise them, then this is their ordination. Which eight? If a bhikkhunī, even if she has been ordained for 100 years, sees a newly-ordained bhikkhu, she should get up, welcome him, pay respect, lay out a clean seat, and invite him to sit down. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. Ānanda, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t abuse a bhikkhu with criticism, she shouldn’t slander him by saying that he has broken the precepts, right view, or proper conduct. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. Ānanda, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t charge a bhikkhu, make him remember, or make him admit, she shouldn’t bar him from investigating others’ offenses, cancel his pātimokkha recitation, or cancel his invitation ceremony. A bhikkhunī shouldn’t criticize a bhikkhu, but a bhikkhu should criticize a bhikkhunī.

<lzh>此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。式叉摩那學戒已，從比丘僧乞受大戒。此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。比丘尼犯僧殘罪，應在二部僧中半月行摩那埵。此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。比丘尼半月從僧乞教授。此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。比丘尼不應在無比丘處夏安居。此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。比丘尼僧安居竟，應比丘僧中求三事自恣見聞疑。此法應尊重恭敬讚歎，盡形壽不得過。如是阿難！我今說此八不可過法，若女人能行者即是受戒。譬如有人於大水上安橋樑而渡。如是阿難！我今為女人說此八不可過法，若能行者即是受戒。」</lzh>
She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. A sikkhamānā who has trained in the precepts should ask the bhikkhu sangha for the full ordination. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. A bhikkhunī who commits a saṅghādisesa offense should undergo probation<note> Mānatta.</note> for half a month in both sanghas. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. A bhikkhunī should ask the (bhikkhu) sangha for instruction every half-month. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. A bhikkhunī shouldn’t spend the rains retreat in a place without bhikkhus. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. After the rains retreat, the bhikkhunī sangha should give the bhikkhu sangha an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected. She should honor, respect, and praise this rule, and may not transgress it for her whole life. In this way, Ānanda, I’ve now spoken these eight rules that can’t be transgressed. If women can practise them, then this is their ordination. As people build a bringe over a great body of water and cross it, so too, Ānanda, I’ve now spoken these eight rules for women that can’t be transgressed. If they can practise them, then this is their ordination.”


<h2>(DgKd03) Mahāpajāpatī’s story (continued)</h2>

<lzh>爾時阿難聞世尊教已，即往摩訶波闍波提所語言：「女人得在佛法中出家受大戒。世尊為女人制八不可過法，若能行者即是受戒。」即為說八事如上。摩訶波闍波提言：「若世尊為女人說此八不可過法，我及五百舍夷女人當共頂受。阿難！譬如男子、女人年少淨潔莊嚴，若有人與洗沐頭已止於堂上，持優鉢羅華鬘、阿希物多華鬘、瞻婆華鬘、蘇曼那華鬘、婆師華鬘授與彼，彼即受之繫置頭上。如是阿難！世尊為女人說八不可過法，我及五百舍夷女人當共頂受。」</lzh>
When Ānanda had heard the World-honored One’s instruction, he went to Mahāpajāpatī and said: “Women may go forth and receive the full ordination in the Buddha’s dhamma. The World-honored One has laid down eight rules for women that can’t be transgressed. If you can practise them, then this is your ordination.” Then he told her the eight rules as above. Mahāpajāpatī said: “If the World-honored One has spoken these eight rules for women that can’t be transgressed, I and the 500 Sakyan women respectfully accept them. Ānanda, as a young man or woman who is clean and has adorned themselves, has had their head washed and rests in a hall, if someone takes a garland of blue lotus flowers, a garland of atimuttaka flowers, a garland of campaka flowers, a garland of sumanā-jasmine flowers, or a garland of vassikā-jasmine flowers and gives it to them, they’d accept it and wind it around their head, so too, Ānanda, I and the 500 Sakyan women respectfully accept the eight rules that can’t be transgressed, that the World-honored One has spoken for women.”

<lzh>時阿難即往世尊所，頭面禮足已却住一面，白佛言：「世尊為女人說八不可過法，摩訶波闍波提等聞已頂受，譬如男子、女人年少淨潔莊嚴，若有人洗沐頭已止於堂上，持諸華鬘授與彼，彼即兩手受之繫置頭上。」「如是阿難！摩訶波闍波提及五百女人得受戒。」佛告阿難：「若女人不於佛法出家者，佛法當得久住五百歲。」阿難聞之不樂，心懷悔恨憂惱涕泣流淚，前禮佛足遶已而去。</lzh>
Then Ānanda went to the World-honored One, paid respect with his head at (the Buddha’s) feet, stood at one side, and said to the Buddha: “Mahāpajāpatī and the others, having heard the eight rules that can’t be transgressed, that the World-honored One has spoken for women, have respectfully accepted them. As a young man or woman who is clean and has adorned themselves, has had their head washed and rests in a hall, if someone takes a flower garland and gives it to them, they’d accept it with both hands and wind it around their head.” “In this way, Ānanda, Mahāpajāpatī and the 500 Sakyan women have obtained the ordination.” The Buddha told Ānanda: “If women hadn’t gone forth in the Buddha’s dhamma, the Buddha’s dhamma would have been able to continue long, for 500 years.” When Ānanda heard this, he was unhappy. Heartbroken, full of regret, miserable, with tears streaming down, he first paid respect at the Buddha’s feet, and having circumambulated him, he left.


<h2>(DgKd04) Ordination Procedure</h2>

<lzh>時有餘女人欲受戒者，彼比丘尼將往佛所，中道遇賊，賊即將毀辱戲弄。諸比丘尼語諸比丘，諸比丘白佛，佛言：「自今已去，聽彼比丘尼即與出家受大戒。應如是與出家。若欲在比丘尼寺內剃髮者應白僧、若一一語令知，然後剃髮。應作如是白：『大姊僧聽！此某甲欲從某甲求剃髮。若僧時到僧忍聽，為某甲剃髮。白如是。』應作如是白已為剃髮。若欲在比丘尼寺內出家者，若白僧、若一一語令知，應作如是白：『大姊僧聽！此某甲從某甲求出家。若僧時到僧忍聽，與某甲出家。白如是。』應作如是白已與出家。應作如是出家，教出家者與著袈裟已，右膝著地合掌，教作如是言：</lzh>
Then there was another woman who wanted to receive the full ordination. The bhikkhunīs took her to the Buddha, and they encountered criminals on the road. The criminals then shamed and teased them. The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha said: “From now on, I allow the bhikkhunīs to give the going forth and the full ordination. You should give the going forth as follows: If you want to shave someone’s head inside the bhikkhunī monastery, you should inform the sangha, or tell each person individually to let them know, and afterwards shave the head. You should carry out the motion as follows: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so wants to request So-and-so to shave her head. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that So-and-so’s head be shaven. This is the motion.’ You should carry out the motion like this, and then shave the head. If you want to give the going forth to someone inside the bhikkhunī monastery, you should inform the sangha, or tell each person individually to let them know. You should carry out the motion as follows: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests the going forth from So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to give So-and-so the going forth. This is the motion.’ You should carry out the motion like this, and then give the going forth. You should carry out the going forth as follows: Having instructed the candidate to put on the monastic robes, she should place her right knee on the ground, join her palms, and be instructed to say: 

<lzh>『我阿姨某甲，歸依佛法僧，我今隨佛出家。和尚某甲，如來、無所著、等正覺是我世尊。』第二、第三亦如是說。『我阿姨某甲，歸依佛法僧竟，我今隨佛出家已。和尚某甲，如來、無所著、等正覺是我世尊。』如是第二、第三說已應授戒，『盡形壽不殺生，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得偷盜，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得婬，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得妄語，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』</lzh>
‘I, Venerable So-and-so, take refuge in the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. I now follow the Buddha and go forth. My preceptor is So-and-so. The Tathāgata, accomplished and fully awakened, is my World-honored One.’ The second and the third time should be recited likewise. ‘I, Venerable So-and-so, have taken refuge in the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. I’ve now followed the Buddha and gone forth. My preceptor is So-and-so. The Tathāgata, accomplished and fully awakened, is my World-honored One.’ When she has recited it a second and a third time, you should give her the precepts: ‘Not to kill living beings for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not steal for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not have sex for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not lie for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.”

<lzh>『盡形壽不得飲酒，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得著華鬘香油塗身，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得歌舞倡伎亦不得往觀，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得高廣大床上坐，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得非時食，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『盡形壽不得捉持生像金銀寶物，是沙彌尼戒。若能持者答言：「能。」』『如是沙彌尼十戒，盡形壽不應犯。』</lzh>
You may not drink alcohol for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not wear flower garlands, and apply perfume and oil on your body for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not sing, dance, play music, and may not go watch it for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not sit on high, broad, and large beds for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not eat at the wrong time for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not take gold, silver, and jewels for your whole life, this is a sāmaṇerī precept. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” These are the 10 sāmeṇerī precepts. You shouldn’t break them for your whole life.’

<lzh>「聽童女十八者，二年中學戒、年滿二十，比丘尼僧中受大戒。若年十歲曾出適者，聽二年學戒、滿十二與受戒。應如是與二歲學戒。沙彌尼應往比丘尼僧中，偏露右肩、脫革屣、禮比丘尼僧足已，右膝著地，合掌白如是言：『大姊僧聽！我某甲沙彌尼，從僧乞二歲學戒，和尚尼某甲。願僧慈愍故，與我二歲學戒。』如是第二、第三說。應將沙彌尼往離聞處著見處已，眾中應差堪能作羯磨者如上，應作白：</lzh>
I allow an 18 year old girl to train in the (sikkhamānā) precepts for two years, and when she’s 20, to receive the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha. If there’s a 10 year old married woman, I allow to train in the (sikkhamānā) precepts for two years, and when she’s 12, to receive the ordination. 
You should give her the training precepts for two years as follows: The sāmaṇerī should go into the midst of the sangha, uncover her right shoulder, take off her leather sandals, pay respect at the bhikkhunī sangha’s feet, place her right knee on the ground, join her palms, and say: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, now ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years with bhikkhunī So-and-so as my preceptor. May the sangha give me the training precepts for two years out of compassion.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. You should take the sāmaṇerī to a place out of earshot but within sight. Then in the sangha, you should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion: 

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此某甲沙彌尼，今從僧乞二歲學戒，和尚尼某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，與某甲沙彌尼二歲學戒，和尚尼某甲。白如是。』『大姊僧聽！此某甲沙彌尼，今從僧乞二歲學戒，和尚尼某甲。僧今與某甲沙彌尼二歲學戒，和尚尼某甲。誰諸大姊忍僧與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒、和尚尼某甲者默然，誰不忍者說。是初羯磨。』如是第二、第三說。『僧已忍與某甲沙彌尼二歲學戒，和尚尼某甲竟。僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This sāmaṇerī So-and-so now asks the sangha for the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to give sāmaṇerī So-and-so the the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This sāmaṇerī So-and-so now asks the sangha for the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha now gives sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha gives this sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as her preceptor, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has accepted to give sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ 

<lzh>「應如是與六法，『某甲諦聽，如來、無所著、等正覺說六法：不得犯不淨行行婬欲法，若式叉摩那行婬欲法，非式叉摩那、非釋種女，與染污心男子共身相摩觸犯戒，應更與戒，是中盡形壽不得犯。若能持者答言：「能。」』『不得偷盜乃至草葉，若式叉摩那取人五錢若過五錢，若自取教人取、若自斫教人斫、若自破教人破、若燒若埋若壞色，非式叉摩那、非釋種女，若取減五錢犯戒，應更與戒，是中盡形壽不得犯。若能者答言：「能。」』『不得故斷眾生命乃至蟻子，若式叉摩那故自手斷人命，求刀授與、教死勸死讚死、若與人非藥、若墮人胎、厭禱呪術、自作教人作，非式叉摩那、非釋種女，若斷畜生不能變化者命犯戒，應更與戒，是中盡形壽不得犯。若能者答言：「能。」』</lzh>
You should give her the six rules as follows: ‘So-and-so, listen carefully. The Tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened, has spoken six rules: You may not commit impure practices and engage in sexual intercourse. If a sikkhamānā engages in sexual intercourse, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a Sakyan daughter. If she has bodily contact with a man with a defiled mind, she breaks the precept and should be given the precepts again. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not steal even grass and leaves. If a sikkhamānā takes from someone (something worth) five coins or more than five coins, whether she takes it herself or instructs others to take it, or whether she cuts it off herself or instructs others to cut it off, or whether she breaks it herself or instructs others to break it, or if she burns it, buries it, or damages the color, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a Sakyan daughter. If she takes (something worth) less than five coins, she breaks the precept and should be given the precepts again. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not intentionally take the life of living beings, even ants. If a sikkhamānā intentionally and with her own hand takes the life of a human being, or seeks a knife to give to someone, or teaches, praises and recommends death, or gives someone fake medicines, or causes an abortion, or curses someone with black magic, whether she does it herself or instructs others to do it, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a Sakyan daughter. If she takes the life of an animal that can’t change shape, she breaks the precept and should be given the precepts again. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. If you can keep it, answer “I can.”

<lzh>『不得妄語乃至戲笑，若式叉摩那不真實無所有，自稱言得上人法，言得禪得解脫得定得正受，得須陀洹果乃至阿羅漢果、天來、龍來、鬼神來供養我，此非式叉摩那、非釋種女，若於眾中故作妄語犯戒，應更與戒，是中盡形壽不得犯。若能者答言：「能。」』『不得非時食，若式叉摩那非時食犯戒，應更與戒，是中盡形壽不得犯。若能者答言：「能。」』『不得飲酒，若式叉摩那飲酒犯戒應更與戒，是中盡形壽不得犯。若能者答言：「能。」』式叉摩那於一切比丘尼戒中應學，除為比丘尼過食、自取食食。應求和尚，作如是言：『大姊！我某甲今求阿姨為和尚。願阿姨為我作和尚，我依阿姨故得受大戒。』如是第二、第三說。和尚應答言：『可爾。』</lzh>
You may not lie, even as a joke. If a sikkhamānā untruthfully praises herself when doesn’t have (these attainments): “I’ve attained a superhuman state, I’ve attained jhāna, liberation, samādhi, mental unity, the fruit of stream-entry, … of arahantship, and the gods, dragons, and spirits came to make offerings to me,” she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a Sakyan daughter. If she intentionally lies in the sangha, she breaks the precept and should be given the precepts again. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not eat at the wrong time. If a sikkhamānā eats at the wrong time, she breaks the precept and should be given the precepts again. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. If you can keep it, answer “I can.” You may not drink alcohol. If a sikkhamānā drinks alcohol, she breaks the precept and should be given the precepts again. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. If you can keep it, answer “I can.”’ A sikkhamānā should train in all bhikkhunī precepts, except that she can hand food to the bhikkhunīs, and can take food herself and eat it. She should request a preceptor and say: “Venerable sister, I, So-and-so, now ask the venerable to be my preceptor. May the venerable act as my preceptor. Supported by the venerable, I’ll be able to receive the full ordination.” The second and the third should be recited likewise. The preceptor should answer: “Okay.”

<lzh>「若式叉摩那學戒已，若年滿二十、若滿十二，應與受大戒白四羯磨。應如是與戒。將受戒人離聞處著見處，是中戒師應差教授師。『大姊僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒。若僧時到僧忍聽，某甲為教授師。白如是。』教授者應至受戒人所語言：『汝此安陀會、欝多羅僧、僧伽梨、此僧竭支覆肩衣、此是鉢，此是汝衣鉢不？諦聽！今是真誠時，我今問汝，有便言有，無當言無。汝字何等？和尚字誰？年滿二十不？衣鉢具不？父母若夫主為聽汝不？不負人債不？非婢不？是女人不？</lzh>
When a sikkhamānā has trained in the precepts and is either 20 or 12 years old, she should be given the full ordination in a formal act with a motion as fourth. You should give the ordination as follows: Take the ordination candidate to a place out of earshot but within sight. Then the precepts master should choose an advisor: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that So-and-so acts as the advisor. This is the motion.’ The advisor should go to the candidate and say: ‘This is your lower robe, this is the upper robe, this is the saṅghāṭī, this is the vest, this is the shoulder-covering robe, this is the bowl. Are these your robes and bowl? Listen carefully! Now is a time of sincerity. Now I’ll ask you. If something is true, you should say that it’s true. If not, you should say that it isn’t true. What’s your name? What’s your preceptor’s name? Are you 20 years old? Are your robes and bowl complete? Have your parents or your husband allowed it? Are you not in debt? Are you not a slavewoman? Are you a woman?

<lzh>女人有如是諸病：癩、白癩、癰疽、乾疽、癲狂、二根、二道合、道小、大小便常漏、大小便涕唾常出。汝有如是諸病不？』若答言：『無。』應語言：『如我向者所問，僧中亦當如是問汝。汝亦當作如是答。』彼教授師問已，應還至僧中，如常威儀至舒手及比丘尼處立，應作白：『大姊僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒。若僧時到僧忍聽，我已教授竟聽使來。白如是。』彼應語言：『來。』來已應為捉鉢，教禮比丘尼僧足，在戒師前胡跪合掌，白如是言：</lzh>
Women have the following diseases: leprosy, mild leprosy, abscesses, tuberculosis, and epilepsy. Are you intersex, are your anus and urinary tract joined, is your vagina small, do you often soil yourself with urine and excrement, are excrement, urine, snot, or saliva often flowing out? Do you have any of these diseases?’ If she answers: ‘No’, you should say: ‘As I’ve asked you about these matters, they’ll also ask you in the same way in the midst of the sangha. You should also answer in the same way.’ When the advisor has asked this, she should return to the sangha with the usual conduct, and stand within arm’s reach of the other bhikkhunīs. She should carry out a motion: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so, requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that I, having instructed her, allow her to come. This is the motion.’ She should then say: ‘Come!’ When (the candidate) has come, (the advisor) should take her bowl, instruct her to pay respect at the bhikkhunī sangha’s feet, to kneel in front of the precepts master, to join her palms, and to carry out a motion as follows:

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！我某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，我某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。眾僧拔濟我，慈愍故。』如是第二、第三說。是中戒師應作白：『大姊僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，我問諸難事。白如是。』『汝諦聽！今是真誠時、實語時。我今問汝，有當言有，無當言無。汝字何等？和尚字誰？年滿二十不？衣鉢具不？父母若夫主聽汝不？汝非負人債不？汝非婢不？汝是女人不？女人有如是諸病：癩、白癩、癰疽、乾痟、癲狂、二根、二道合、道小、大小便常漏、大小便涕唾常出。汝有如是諸病不？』答言：『無。』應作白：</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. I, So-and-so, request to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I, So-and-so, now ask to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as my preceptor. May the sangha rescue me out of compassion.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. Then the precepts master should carry out a motion: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that I ask her about the difficulties. This is the motion.’ ‘Listen carefully! Now is a time of sincerity, a time of speaking the truth. Now I’ll ask you. If something is true, you should say that it’s true. If not, you should say that it isn’t true. What’s your name? What’s your preceptor’s name? Are you 20 years old? Are your robes and bowl complete? Have your parents or your husband allowed it? Are you not in debt? Are you not a slavewoman? Are you a woman? Women have the following diseases: leprosy, mild leprosy, abscesses, tuberculosis, and epilepsy. Are you intersex, are your anus and urinary tract joined, is your vagina small, do you often soil yourself with urine and excrement, are excrement, urine, snot, or saliva often flowing out? Do you have any of these diseases?’ If she answers: ‘No’, the motion should be carried out:

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。某甲所說清淨，無諸難事，年滿二十，衣鉢具足。若僧時到僧忍聽，為某甲受大戒，和尚尼某甲。白如是。』『大姊僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從眾僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。某甲所說清淨，無諸難事，年滿二十、衣鉢具足。僧今授某甲大戒，和尚尼某甲。誰諸大姊忍僧授某甲大戒、和尚尼某甲者默然，誰不忍者說。是初羯磨竟。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已忍與某甲受大戒竟、和尚尼某甲，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so has said that she’s pure and without the difficulties, that she’s 20, and that her robes and bowl are complete. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so has said that she’s pure and without the difficulties, that she’s 20, and that her robes and bowl are complete. The sangha now gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has accepted to give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’

<lzh>「彼受戒者，與比丘尼僧俱，至比丘僧中，禮僧足已，右膝著地合掌，作如是言：『大德僧聽！我某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，我某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。願僧拔濟我，慈愍故。』如是第二、第三說(此中戒師應問如上問法)。問已應問言：『汝學戒未？汝清淨不？』若答言：『已學戒、清淨。』應問餘比丘尼：『已學戒未？清淨不？』若答言：『已學戒、清淨。』即應作白：『大德僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。某甲所說清淨，無諸難事，年歲已滿，衣鉢具足，已學戒清淨。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧今為某甲受大戒，和尚尼某甲。白如是。』</lzh>
That candidate, together with the bhikkhunī sangha, goes into the midst of the bhikkhu sangha. Having paid respect at the sangha’s feet, she places her right knee on the ground, joins her palms, and says: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. I, So-and-so, request to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I, So-and-so, now ask to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as my preceptor. May the sangha rescue me out of compassion.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. (Then the precepts master should ask the questions as above.) Having asked, he should also ask: ‘Have you trained in the precepts? Are you pure?’ If she answers: ‘I’ve trained in the precepts and am pure’, he should ask the other bhikkhunīs: ‘Has she trained in the precepts? Is she pure?’ If they answer: ‘She has trained in the precepts and is pure’, he should carry out the motion: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so has said that she’s pure and without the difficulties, that she’s old enough, that her robes and bowl are complete, and that she has trained in the precepts and is pure. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion.’ 

<lzh>大德僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。某甲所說清淨，無諸難事，年歲已滿、衣鉢具足、已學戒清淨。僧今為某甲受大戒，和尚尼某甲。誰諸長老忍僧與某甲受大戒、和尚尼某甲者默然，誰不忍者說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已忍為某甲受大戒竟、和尚尼某甲，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』</lzh>
‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so has said that she’s pure and without the difficulties, that she’s old enough, that her robes and bowl are complete, and that she has trained in the precepts and is pure. The sangha now gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the venerables who accept that the sangha gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has accepted to give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’

<lzh>「『善女人諦聽！如來、無所著、等正覺說八波羅夷法，若比丘尼犯者，非比丘尼、非釋種女。不得作不淨行行婬欲法。若比丘尼作不淨行行婬欲法，乃至共畜生，非比丘尼、非釋種女。汝是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』
『不得偷盜乃至草葉。若比丘尼取人五錢若過五錢，若自取教人取、若自斫教人斫、若自破教人破、若燒若埋若壞色者，非比丘尼、非釋種女。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』
『不得斷眾生命乃至蟻子。若比丘尼自手斷人命、持刀授與人、教死讚死勸死、與人非藥、若墮胎厭禱呪術，若自作方便教人作，彼非比丘尼非釋種女。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』</lzh>
‘Good woman, listen carefully! The Tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened has spoken eight pārājika rules. If a bhikkhunī breaks them, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You may not commit impure practices and engage in sexual intercourse. If a bhikkhunī commits impure practices and engages in sexual intercourse, even together with an animal, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ 

‘You may not steal even grass and leaves. If a bhikkhunī takes from someone (something worth) five coins or more than five coins, whether she takes it herself or instructs others to take it, or whether she cuts it off herself or instructs others to cut it off, or whether she breaks it herself or instructs others to break it, or if she burns it, buries it, or damages the color, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ 

‘You may not take the life of living beings, even ants. If a bhikkhunī with her own hand takes the life of a human being, or gives a knife to someone, or teaches, praises and recommends death, or gives someone fake medicines, or causes an abortion, or curses someone with black magic, whether she does it herself or plans it and instructs others to do it, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ 

<lzh>『不得作妄語乃至戲笑。若比丘尼不真實非己有、自稱言得上人法、得禪得解脫三昧正受、得須陀洹果乃至阿羅漢果，天來、龍來、鬼神來供養我。彼非比丘尼非釋種女。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』
『不得身相觸乃至共畜生。若比丘尼染污心、與染污心男子身相觸、腋已下膝已上、若摩若捺、逆摩順摩、若牽若推、若舉若下、若捉若急捺。彼非比丘尼非釋種女。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』</lzh>
‘You may not lie, even as a joke. If a bhikkhunī, untruthfully praises herself when doesn’t have (these attainments): “I’ve attained a superhuman state, I’ve attained jhānas, liberations, samādhi, mental unity, the fruit of stream-entry, … of arahantship, and the gods, dragons, and spirits came to make offerings to me,” she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’

‘You may not come in bodily contact, even with an animal. If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind comes in bodily contact with a man with a defiled mind, below the armpits and above the knees; and if they grasp<note> I translate 若摩若捺 as one word, in line with pācittiya 124: 若捉摩. Otherwise 捺 would occur twice in this list.</note>, rub upwards and downwards, pull, push, lift up, set down, hold, and hastily press each other, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’

<lzh>『不得犯八事乃至共畜生。若比丘尼有染污心、受染污心男子，捉手、捉衣、至屏處住、若共立、屏處語、若共行、若身相近、若共期。犯此八事，彼非比丘尼非釋種女。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』
『不應覆藏他重罪乃至突吉羅、惡說。若比丘尼知比丘尼犯波羅夷，不自舉亦不白僧、不語人令知。後於異時，此比丘尼，若休道、若滅擯、若遮不共僧事、若入外道，彼作如是言：「我先知此人犯如是如是罪。」彼非比丘尼非釋種女，覆藏他重罪故。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』</lzh>
‘You may not commit the eight things, even with an animal. If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind lets a man with a defiled mind hold her hand, and hold her robes, and they stay in a secluded place, and stand together, talk together in the secluded place, walk together, bring their bodies close to each other, and make appointments, committing these eight things, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’

‘You may not conceal another’s heavy offenses, down to dukkaṭas and bad speech. If a bhikkhunī knows that another bhikkhunī has committed a pārājika, and neither charges her herself, nor informs the sangha, nor lets others know, and at a later time, when that bhikkhunī has either disrobed, or been permanently expelled, or been barred from conducting sangha matters with the others, or has joined a non-Buddhist group, says: “I previously already knew that this person had committed such-and-such an offense,” she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter, because she concealed another’s heavy offense. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’

<lzh>『不得隨被舉比丘語乃至沙彌。若比丘尼，知比丘為僧所舉，如法、如毘尼、如佛所教，犯威儀未懺悔不作共住，便隨順彼比丘語。諸比丘尼諫此比丘尼言：「大姊！彼比丘為僧所舉，如法、如毘尼、如佛所教，犯威儀未懺悔，不作共住，莫隨順彼比丘語。」諸比丘尼諫此比丘尼時堅持不捨，諸比丘尼應乃至三諫，捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善，不捨者非比丘尼非釋種女，犯隨舉。是中盡形壽不得犯，能持不？』答言：『能。』</lzh>
‘You may not follow what a suspended bhikkhu says, not even a sāmaṇera. If a bhikkhunī knows that a bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, that he has transgressed against proper conduct, not yet repented, and hasn’t yet been allowed to live with the community again, and she still follows what that bhikkhu says, the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Venerable sister, this bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha, according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, he has transgressed against proper conduct, not yet repented, and hasn’t yet been allowed to live with the community again. Don’t follow what that bhikkhu says.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish that bhikkhunī, she holds firmly on to it and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her up to three times to give up this matter. If she gives it up by the third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a Sakyan daughter, and has committed (the offense) of following a suspended one. You therefore may not commit this for your whole life. Can you keep it?’ She answers: ‘I can.’

<lzh>「『善女人諦聽！如來、無所著、等正覺說四依法，比丘尼依此出家受大戒，是比丘尼法，是中盡形壽能持不？』答言：『能。』『依糞掃衣出家受大戒，是比丘尼法。是中盡形壽能持不？』答言：『能。』『若得長利，檀越施衣、割截衣應受。』
『依乞食出家受大戒，是比丘尼法。是中盡形壽能持不？』答言：『能。』『若得長利，若僧差食、若檀越送食、月八日食、十五日食、月初日食、若眾僧常食、檀越請食應受。』</lzh>
‘Good woman, listen carefully! The Tathāgata, without attachment and fully awakened has spoken of four supports. A bhikkhunī relies on these to go forth and receive the full ordination. This is a bhikkhunī rule. Can you keep this for your whole life?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ 
She relies on rag robes to go forth and receive the full ordination. This is a bhikkhunī rule. Can you keep this for your whole life?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ ‘If you obtain extra requisites and supporters offer you robes, you should accept patchwork robes.’
She relies on almsround to go forth and receive the full ordination. This is a bhikkhunī rule. Can you keep this for your whole life?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ ‘If you obtain extra requisites and the sangha sends food or supporters send food, or if there’s a meal on the eighth and the fifteenth day of the month, or on the first day of the month, or if there’s a permanent meal for the sangha, or if supporters invite you for a meal, you should accept it.’

<lzh>『依樹下坐出家受大戒，是比丘尼法。是中盡形壽能持不？』答言：『能。』『若得長利，別房、尖頭屋、小房、石室、兩房一戶應受。』
『依腐爛藥出家受大戒，是比丘尼法。是中盡形壽能持不？』答言：『能。』『若得長利，酥、油、生酥、蜜、石蜜應受。』</lzh>
She relies on living under a tree to go forth and receive the full ordination. This is a bhikkhunī rule. Can you keep this for your whole life?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ ‘If you obtain extra requisites, a separate building, a house with a pointed roof, a small building, a stone house, or two rooms with a common door, you should accept it.’
She relies on fermented urine as medicine to go forth and receive the full ordination. This is a bhikkhunī rule. Can you keep this for your whole life?’ She answers: ‘I can.’ ‘If you obtain extra requisites, ghee, oil, butter, honey, and sugar, you should accept them.’

<lzh>『汝已受戒竟，白四羯磨如法成就得處所、和尚如法、阿闍梨如法，二部僧具足。當善受教法，應勸化作福治塔供養佛法僧。和尚阿闍梨一切如法教勅不得違逆，應學問誦經勤求方便於佛法中得須陀洹果、斯陀含果、阿那含果、阿羅漢果。汝始發心出家，功不唐捐果報不斷。餘所未知，當問和尚阿闍梨。』令受戒人在前而去。」</lzh>
You’ve received the ordination in a formal act with a motion as fourth according to dhamma. You’ve successfully obtained your place, with a preceptor according to dhamma, with a teacher according to dhamma, and both sanghas have fully ordained you. You should receive good teachings in the dhamma, encourage others to make merit, look after stupas, and support the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. When your preceptor and teachers all instruct you according to dhamma, you may not disobey them. You should learn knowledge, recite suttas, and strive with skillful means to attain the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and arahantship in the Buddha’s dhamma. You should mentally determine to make your going-forth successful, not to waste it, with enduring results. As for other things that you don’t know yet, you should ask your preceptor and teachers.’ They leave with the candidate in front.”


<h2>(DgKd05) Other ordination rules</h2>

<lzh>爾時白四羯磨受大戒者，舉舍夷拘梨諸比丘尼：「世尊有如是言：『受大戒應白四羯磨。』我曹得戒，汝等不得戒。」時摩訶波闍波提比丘尼聞之心疑，諸比丘白佛，佛言：「摩訶波闍波提比丘尼，及舍夷諸比丘尼亦得戒。」</lzh>
At that time, those who had received the full ordination in a formal act with a motion as fourth, said to the Sakyan and Kolīyan bhikkhunīs: “The World-honored One has said the following: ‘The full ordination should be given in a formal act with a motion as fourth.’ We’ve received the ordination, you haven’t received the ordination.” When Mahāpajāpatī bhikkhunī heard this, doubt arose in her mind. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Mahāpajāpatī bhikkhunī and the Sakyan bhikkhunīs have also received the ordination.”

<lzh>爾時有立乞戒者，有白衣見即言：「在此中立者欲求男子。」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「不應立乞戒，應長跪乞戒。」</lzh>
At that time, someone asked for the ordination while standing. Lay people saw it and then said: “The one who stands among them wants to search for men.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You shouldn’t ask for the ordination while standing. You should ask for the ordination while kneeling.”

<lzh>時有蹲乞戒，即倒地形露，羞慚不能乞戒。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「餘比丘尼應代為白。」</lzh>
Then someone asked for the ordination while squatting. She fell on the ground and exposed her body. She was ashamed and not able to ask for the ordination. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Another bhikkhunī should speak on her behalf.”


<h2>(DgKd06) Ordination by messenger</h2>

<lzh>時舍夷拘梨諸比丘尼將欲受大戒者詣僧伽藍，道路遇賊，毀犯比丘尼。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽遣使為受戒。聽一比丘尼清淨無難者，僧作白二羯磨差作使。眾中應差堪能羯磨者如上，作如是白：『大姊僧聽！若僧時到僧忍聽，今僧差某甲比丘尼作使，為某甲比丘尼從比丘僧乞受大戒。白如是。』『大姊僧聽！僧今差某甲比丘尼作使，為某甲比丘尼從比丘僧乞受大戒。誰諸大姊忍僧差某甲比丘尼作使，為某甲比丘尼從比丘僧中乞受大戒者默然；誰不忍者說。』『僧已忍差某甲比丘尼作使竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』獨行無護，應差二三比丘尼共去。受使比丘尼應至比丘僧中，禮僧足、右膝著地，合掌作如是白：</lzh>
When the Sakyan and Kolīyan bhikkhunīs took a candidate to the (bhikkhu) monastery, they encountered criminals on the way who harrassed them. The bhikkhus told the Buddha and the Buddha said: “I allow to send a messenger to receive the ordination. I allow that when a bhikkhunī is pure and without the difficulties, the sangha carries out a formal act with a motion as second to choose a messenger. In the sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows: ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so as the messenger to ask the bhikkhu sangha for the full ordination for bhikkhunī So-and-so. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. The sangha now chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so as the messenger to ask the bhikkhu sangha for the full ordination for bhikkhunī So-and-so. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so as the messenger to ask the bhikkhu sangha for the full ordination for bhikkhunī So-and-so, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak.’ ‘The sangha has accepted to choose bhikkhunī So-and-so as the messenger. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ If she goes alone, she has no protection. They should choose two or three bhikkhunīs to go together. The messenger bhikkhunī should go into the midst of the bhikkhu sangha, pay respect at the sangha’s feet, place her right knee on the ground, join her palms, and carry out the following motion: 

<lzh>『大德僧聽！此某甲比丘尼從某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。願僧拔濟我，慈愍故。』如是第二、第三說。比丘僧應問：『彼字何等？和尚尼是誰？已學戒未？清淨不？』若答言：『已學戒、清淨。』者，復應問伴比丘尼：『已學戒清淨未耶？』若答言：『已學戒清淨。』者，眾中應差堪能作羯磨者如上，應作白：『大德僧聽！此某甲比丘尼從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。某甲已學戒清淨，年歲已滿，衣鉢具足。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與某甲受大戒，和尚尼某甲。白如是。』</lzh>
‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This bhikkhunī So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. May the sangha rescue (her)<note> The Chinese text says “me”.</note> out of compassion.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. The bhikkhu sangha should ask: ‘What’s her name? What’s her preceptor’s name? Has she trained in the (sikkhamānā) precepts? Is she pure?’ If (the messenger) answers: ‘She has trained in the precepts and is pure’, they should also ask her companion bhikkhunīs: ‘Has she trained in the precepts and is pure?’ If they answer: ‘She has trained in the precepts and is pure’, then, in the sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. He should carry out the motion: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This bhikkhunī So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so has trained in the precepts, is pure, is old enough, and her robes and bowl are complete. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion.’

<lzh>『大德僧聽！此某甲從和尚尼某甲求受大戒，此某甲今從僧乞受大戒，和尚尼某甲。某甲已學戒清淨，年歲已滿，衣鉢具足。僧今與某甲受大戒，和尚尼某甲。誰諸長老忍僧與某甲受大戒、和尚尼某甲者默然，誰不忍者說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已忍與某甲受大戒、和尚尼某甲竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』彼使應還比丘尼寺內語言：『大妹！汝已受大戒竟。』」</lzh>
‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so requests to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so now asks to receive the full ordination from the sangha with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so has trained in the precepts, is pure, is old enough, and her robes and bowl are complete. The sangha now gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the venerables who accept that the sangha gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has accepted to give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ The messenger should return to the bhikkhunī monastery and say: ‘Venerable younger sister, you’ve received the full ordination.’”


<h2>(DgKd07) Other ordination requirements</h2>

<lzh>世尊有如是教，聽遣使受戒。彼便以小小顏貌遣使受戒。佛言：「不應以小小顏貌便遣使受戒。」</lzh>
The World-honored One had taught like this and had allowed to give ordination by messenger. Then they gave ordination by messenger for people of little beauty. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give ordination by messenger for people of little beauty.”

<lzh>彼授常血出者大戒，血污身污臥具，佛言：「不應授血出者大戒。」</lzh>
They gave the full ordination to people who constantly menstruated. The blood soiled their bodies and the bedding. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to people who menstruate.”

<lzh>世尊有如是教，不應授血出者大戒。彼便授月水不出者大戒，彼放逸情多。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「不應授月水不出者大戒。」</lzh>
The World-honored One had taught like this and hadn’t allowed to give the full ordination to people who menstruated. They then gave the full ordination to people who didn’t menstruate. They were very unrestrained. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to people who don’t menstruate (at all).”

<lzh>彼授無乳者大戒，佛言：「不應授無乳者大戒。」</lzh>
They gave the full ordination to people without breasts. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to people without breasts.”

<lzh>彼授一乳者大戒，佛言：「不應授一乳者大戒。」</lzh>
They gave the full ordination to people with one breast. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to people with one breast.”

<lzh>彼授二道爛壞者大戒，佛言：「不應授二道爛壞者大戒。」</lzh>
They gave the full ordination to people whose anus and urinary tract were rotting and decaying. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to people whose anus and urinary tract are rotting and decaying.”

<lzh>彼授二道爛臭者大戒，佛言：「不應授二道爛臭者大戒。」</lzh>
They gave the full ordination to people whose anus and urinary tract were rotting and stank. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to people whose anus and urinary tract are rotting and stink.”

<lzh>彼授二根者大戒，佛言：「不應授二根者大戒。」</lzh>
They gave the full ordination to intersex people. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t give the full ordination to intersex people.”


<h2>Other miscellaneous rules</h2>

<lzh>時諸比丘聚一處共誦法毘尼，諸比丘尼作如是念：「我等亦當應誦法毘尼不？」佛言：「應誦。」不知誰間受誦？佛言：「應在比丘間受誦。」諸比丘作如是念：「我等得與比丘尼誦偈句不？」佛言：「聽誦。」在前教，彼羞慚，佛言：「聽在比丘背後敷座誦，若十種衣中一一衣聽作障。」</lzh>
(DgKd08) Then the bhikkhus gathered in one place to recite dhamma and vinaya together. The bhikkhunīs thought: “Should we also recite dhamma and vinaya?” The Buddha said: “You should recite.” They didn’t know from whom to learn to recite. The Buddha said: “You should learn to recite from the bhikkhus.” The bhikkhus thought: “Are we allowed to recite verses with bhikkhunīs?” The Buddha said: “I allow to recite.” They instructed in front of them, and were ashamed. The Buddha said: “I allow to lay out seats behind the bhikkhus to recite, or I allow to make a screen with any of the 10 kinds of cloths.”

<lzh>時六群比丘尼，以小小因緣瞋恚不喜，捨佛法僧，言：「不獨有沙門釋子種可修梵行，更有餘沙門婆羅門，我今亦可於彼修梵行。」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「若比丘尼瞋恚捨戒，不成捨戒。」</lzh>
(DgKd09) Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs for some tiny reason, angry and dissatisfied, renounced the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha: “There aren’t only the renunciates that are children of the Sakyan who can practise a monastic life. There are also other renunciates and brahmins. Now we can also practise the monastic life with them.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “If a bhikkhunī angrily gives up the precepts, she doesn’t accomplish giving up the precepts<note> i.e. she hasn’t disrobed.</note>.”

<lzh>時六群比丘尼作蠱道、教他作，佛言：「不應爾。」</lzh>
(DgKd10) Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs performed witchcraft and instructed others to do it. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.”

<lzh>六群比丘為六群比丘尼作羯磨，彼比丘尼隨順言教不敢違逆，乞解羯磨，彼不肯解。時諸居士見已作如是言：「彼不隨意故便作如是語。」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘不應與比丘尼作羯磨。」時諸比丘尼與作羯磨，佛言：「聽比丘尼與比丘尼作羯磨。若不知者，聽比丘邊誦羯磨已然後作羯磨。」</lzh>
(DgKd11) Then the group-of-six bhikkhus carried out a formal act for the group-of-six bhikkhunīs, and the bhikkhunīs repeated the words they taught them and didn’t dare to oppose. They asked be released from the formal act, but (the bhikkhus) weren’t willing to release them. When the householders saw it, they said: “Because they didn’t want it, they speak like this.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Bhikkhus shouldn’t carry out a formal act for the bhikkhunīs.” Then the bhikkhunīs carried out formal acts. The Buddha said: “I allow the bhikkhunīs to carry out formal acts for the bhikkhunīs. If they don’t know how, I allow the bhikkhus to recite the formal act to one side, and to carry out the formal act afterwards.”

<lzh>爾時有比丘欲休道，摩訶波闍波提比丘尼知，疑不敢與說法呵，世尊有如是教，比丘尼不得呵比丘。時摩訶波闍波提比丘尼，往世尊所頭面禮足却住一面，白佛言：「比丘尼一切不得呵比丘耶？」佛言：「比丘尼不一切不得呵比丘；比丘尼不應罵比丘，不得呵責比丘，不應誹謗若破見、破戒、破威儀，不應如是呵。瞿曇彌！若教持增上戒、增上心、增上智、學問誦經，如是事應呵。」</lzh>
(DgKd12) Then there was a bhikkhu who wanted to disrobe. Mahāpajāpatī bhikkhunī knew about it, had doubts, and didn’t dare to admonish him with a dhamma talk. The World-honored One had taught the following: A bhikkhunī isn’t allowed to criticize a bhikkhu. Then Mahāpajāpatī bhikkhunī went to the World-honored One, paid respect with her head at his feet, stood at one side, and said to the Buddha: “Is a bhikkhunī not allowed to admonish a bhikkhu under all circumstances?” The Buddha said: “It’s not the case that a bhikkhunī isn’t allowed to admonish a bhikkhu under all circumstances. A bhikkhunī shouldn’t abuse a bhikkhu, may not criticize a bhikkhu, shouldn’t slander him, and if he has broken right view, the precepts, or proper conduct, she shouldn’t criticize him for this. Gotamī, if she instructs him to keep the higher virtue, or instructs in the higher mind, the higher wisdom, knowledge, or the recitation of suttas, in such matters she should admonish him.”

<lzh>時諸比丘尼髮長，佛言：「聽剃。」若自剃時，有年少剃髮師，為年少比丘尼剃髮，覺細滑欲意起，欲犯比丘尼，比丘尼便高聲言：「莫爾！莫爾！」餘比丘尼聞，問言：「何故高聲『莫爾！莫爾！』耶？」彼即具為說之。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「剃髮時聽共伴。若俱有欲意者不應令剃。」彼使男子除鼻中毛，佛言：「不應令男子除鼻中毛。」彼令男子剪爪，佛言：「不應令男子剪爪。」</lzh>
(DgKd13) Then the bhikkhunīs’ hair was long. The Buddha said: “I allow to shave it.” When they shaved it themselves, there was a young hairdresser, who shaved the head of a young bhikkhunī. He realized how smooth it was, thoughts of desire arose in him, and he wanted to rape the bhikkhunī. She loudly called out: “Don’t do that! Don’t do that!” When the other bhikkhunīs heard her, they asked: “Why do you loudly call out ‘Don’t do that! Don’t do that!’?” Then she fully explained it. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “When you shave the head, I allow to be together with a companion. If all have thoughts of desire, you shouldn’t let him shave.” Then they had men remove the hair in the nose. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t have a man remove the hair in the nose.” Then they had men cut the fingernails. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t have a man cut your fingernails.”

<lzh>時比丘尼在白衣家內，有比丘來乞食，彼比丘尼不敢語。何以故？恐比丘謂是比丘尼教化食。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽語主人令知，但莫讚歎。」</lzh>
(DgKd14) Then when the bhikkhunīs were in a lay house and a bhikkhu came on almsround, the bhikkhunīs didn’t dare to speak. Why? They were afraid that the bhikkhu would say that the bhikkhunīs instruct about the food. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to speak with the owner to let them know, but don’t praise them.”

<lzh>時有比丘尼在白衣家內，有比丘來不起。白佛，佛言：「應起。若比丘尼一坐食，若作餘食法不食、若病若足食已，聽作如是語：『大德！我有如是因緣故不起。』」</lzh>
(DgKd15) Then there were bhikkhunīs inside a lay house who, when a bhikkhu came, didn’t get up. They told the Buddha. The Buddha said: “You should get up. If a bhikkhunī eats in one session, or doesn’t eat when the leftover food procedure has been carried out, or is sick, or already has enough food, she should say: ‘Venerable, because I’ve such-and-such a reason I don’t get up.’”

<lzh>時有比丘尼，白衣家不問比丘便坐。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼在白衣家，不應不問比丘便坐。」</lzh>
(DgKd16) Then there were bhikkhunīs inside a lay house who sat down without asking the bhikkhus. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Bhikkhunīs inside a lay house shouldn’t sit down without asking the bhikkhus.”

<lzh>爾時六群比丘，清旦著衣持鉢至白衣家，白衣家內有常教化比丘尼，彼見比丘來便起問言：「大德！我坐耶？」比丘言：「莫坐。」彼比丘尼習樂不堪久立，即便倒地得病。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「應相望前人可坐便坐。」</lzh>
(DgKd17) Then the group-of-six bhikkhus put on their robes at dawn, took their bowls, and went to a lay house. Inside the lay house, there was a bhikkhunī who often gave teachings. When she saw the bhikkhus coming, she got up and asked: “Venerables, may I sit down?” The bhikkhus said: “Don’t sit down.” The bhikkhunī was used to comfort and couldn’t endure standing for a long time. She fell to the ground and became sick. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You should consider this person. If it’s suitable to sit, she should sit.”

<lzh>時諸比丘尼共比丘在道行，在前行、或並語並行、或在前或在後、或反抄衣、或纏頸、或覆頭、或通肩披衣、或著革屣。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「不應爾。應偏露右肩、脫革屣，在比丘後。」</lzh>
(DgKd18) Then the bhikkhunīs walked on a road together with bhikkhus. They walked in front, some talked and walked at the same time, some were in front and some behind, some had their robes reversed<note> Inside out and on the wrong shoulder.</note>, or around the neck, or had their head covered, or both shoulders covered, or wore leather sandals. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that. You should uncover your right shoulder, take off your leather sandals, and stay behind the bhikkhus.”

<lzh>時諸比丘尼有佛法僧事，有病比丘尼所須事不敢在前去，佛言：「聽白比丘已便去。」彼有命難、有梵行難畏慎不敢不問便去，佛言：「若有如是難事，若問若不問聽去。」時有比丘尼在道行，見比丘不避道，佛言：「應避道。」時有比丘尼在道行，見有比丘避道，天雨脚跌倒地得病。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「有如是因緣，比丘尼應小曲身合掌言：『大德！恕我道迮。』」</lzh>
(DgKd19) Then the bhikkhunīs had matters of the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, and they had to attend to the needs of sick bhikkhunīs. They didn’t dare to walk in front. The Buddha said: “I allow to inform the bhikkhus and then go.” Their life was in danger, or their celibacy was in danger. They were afraid and cautious, and didn’t dare to go without asking. The Buddha said: “If there are such difficulties, I allow to go whether you’ve asked or not.” Then there were bhikkhunīs walking on a road and when they saw bhikkhus, they didn’t move to the side of the road. The Buddha said: “You should move to the side of the road.” Then there were bhikkhunīs walking on a road and when they saw bhikkhus, they moved to the side of the road. It was raining, they slipped, fell to the ground, and became sick. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “If there’s such a reason, the bhikkhunīs should bend their bodies, join their palms, and say: ‘Venerables, excuse us for making the path narrow.’”

<lzh>爾時有檀越請二部僧，先與比丘尼食，後與比丘食。白佛，佛言：「不應先與比丘尼僧食；應先與比丘僧，然後與比丘尼僧。」</lzh>
(DgKd20) Then there was a supporter who invited both sanghas. They first gave food to the bhikkhunīs, and later gave food to the bhikkhus. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You shouldn’t first give food to the bhikkhunī sangha. You should first give to the bhikkhu sangha, and afterwards give to the bhikkhunī sangha.”

<lzh>爾時有檀越請二部僧，彼如是念：「佛有教應先與比丘僧食，然後與比丘尼僧食。」彼便先與比丘僧食竟，日時已過。白佛，佛言：「若時欲過應一時與。」</lzh>
(DgKd21) Then there was a supporter who invited both sanghas and thought: “The Buddha has taught that we should first give food to the bhikkhu sangha, and afterwards give food to the bhikkhunī sangha.” Then when they had first given to the bhikkhu sangha, the time of the day had already passed. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “If the time is about to pass, you should give at the same time.”

<lzh>爾時有居士，請比丘尼僧明日與食，彼於夜半辦具種種肥美食已，晨旦往白時到。時諸比丘尼，清旦著衣持鉢往詣其家，彼此相問年歲大小頃，日時便過。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「若時過，聽上座八比丘尼次第坐，餘者隨坐。」</lzh>
(DgKd22) Then there was a householder who invited the bhikkhunī sangha for a meal for the next day. When, from midnight on, they had prepared all kinds of rich foods, they went in the early morning and informed them that the time had come. Then the bhikkhunīs put on their robes at dawn, took their bowls, and went to their house. There they asked each other about their seniority for a while, and the time of the day passed. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “If the time is passing, I allow the most senior eight bhikkhunīs to sit in order of seniority, and the rest to just sit behind.”

<lzh>時諸比丘尼，來至比丘僧伽藍中，佛言：「聽與床座。」比丘尼月水出，污貯繩床、木床、臥具起去。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在貯繩床、木床上座。」彼僧伽藍中求教授、或受請或聽法、無坐處，佛言：「聽若石上坐、若在墼上坐、若在杌木頭上坐、若草上樹葉上坐、若梁上坐。」比丘尼不忍苦遂便得病，佛言：「應語比丘尼言：『若能愛護坐具者，便與坐。』」</lzh>
(DgKd23) Then the bhikkhunīs came to a bhikkhu monastery. The Buddha said: “You should give them benches and seats.” The bhikkhunīs’ menstrual fluid flowed out and soiled the stuffed rope beds, wooden beds, and the sleeping equipment. They got up and left. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunī shouldn’t sit on stuffed rope beds and wooden beds.” They asked for instruction in the monastery, or had been invited, or listened to the dhamma, and there were no places to sit. The Buddha said: “I allow to sit on a stone, on a brick, on a tree stump, on grass, on leaves, or on a beam.” The bhikkhunīs couldn’t bear the pain and subsequently became sick. The Buddha said: “You should tell the bhikkhunīs: ‘If you can take good care of the sitting mat, just sit down.’”

<lzh-fascicle-end>四分律卷第四十八</lzh-fascicle-end>
<en-fascicle-end>Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, fascicle 48.</en-fascicle-end>


<lzh-fascicle-start>四分律卷第四十九(三分之十三)
姚秦罽賓三藏佛陀耶舍共竺佛念等譯
比丘尼揵度之下</lzh-fascicle-start>

<en-fascicle-start>Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, fascicle 49.
Translated by the Kāśmīra Tipiṭaka master Buddhayaśas together with Zhú Fóniàn in the later Qin state.
Bhikkhunī Khandhaka, the remainder.</en-fascicle-start>

<lzh>爾時世尊在波羅㮈，時世穀貴人民飢餓乞求難得。諸比丘尼受食已故有餘食，諸比丘尼作如是念：「我等此食得與比丘不？」佛言：「得與。」復念：「得為比丘授食不？」佛言：「得授。」「我等宿食與比丘，為淨不？」佛言：「淨。」時諸比丘受食已有餘食，念言：「我等此食得與比丘尼不？」佛言：「得與。」「得為比丘尼授食不？」佛言：「得授與。」時有宿食，念言：「與比丘尼淨不？」佛言：「淨。」</lzh>
(DgKd24) At that time, the World-honored One was in Vārāṇasī. Then grain had become expensive in the world, people were hungry, and almsfood was hard to get. When the bhikkhunīs had received food and there were some leftovers, they thought: “May we give this food to the bhikkhus?” The Buddha said: “You may give it.” They thought again: “May we offer food to the bhikkhus?” The Buddha said: “You may offer it.” “If we give food stored overnight to the bhikkhus, is it pure?” The Buddha said: “It’s pure.” Then the bhikkhus, having received food, had leftovers and thought: “May we give this food to the bhikkhunīs?” The Buddha said: “You may give it.” “May we offer food to the bhikkhunīs?” The Buddha said: “You may offer and give it.” Then there was food stored overnight and they thought: “If we give it to the bhikkhunīs, is it pure?” The Buddha said: “It’s pure.”

<lzh>爾時比丘尼在阿蘭若處住，後異時阿蘭若處有事起，諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在阿蘭若處住。」</lzh>
(DgKd25) Then the bhikkhunīs stayed in the wilderness. At a later time, problems arose in the wilderness. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Bhikkhunīs shouldn’t stay in the wilderness.”

<lzh>時有比丘尼在白衣家內住，見他夫主共婦嗚口捫摸身體捉捺乳，年少比丘尼見已，便生厭離佛法心。諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽為比丘尼別作住處。」彼比丘尼便在別住處作技教他作，佛言：「比丘尼不應在住處作技。」比丘尼在別住處酤酒，佛言：「不應在別住處酤酒。」彼比丘尼安婬女在住處，佛言：「不應爾。」彼為具香華莊身之具，佛言：「不應爾。」</lzh>
(DgKd26) Then there were bhikkhunīs who lived in lay houses and they saw the husband kiss his wive, caress her body, and grasp her breasts. When the young bhikkhunīs saw this, disenchantment with the Buddha’s dhamma arose in their minds. The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, the bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to build residences for the bhikkhunīs separately.” The bhikkhunīs engaged in (various) skills in their separate residences and taught them to others. The Buddha said: “Bhikkhunīs shouldn’t engage in skills in their residences.” The bhikkhunīs sold alcohol in their separate residences. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t sell alcohol in your separate residences.” The bhikkhunīs put prostitutes into their residences. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They provided incense, flowers, and accessories to adorn the body. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.”

<lzh>時六群比丘尼，在巷陌四衢道頭市中糞掃聚邊立住，諸居士見皆共譏嫌呵罵言：「此比丘尼，無有慚愧無有淨行，外自稱言：『我知正法。』如是何有正法？在如是處立住，如似婬女。」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在如是處立住。」</lzh>
(DgKd27) Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs stood on major roads, at crossroads, on markets, and next to garbage heaps. When the householders saw it, they were all upset and criticized them: “These bhikkhunīs have no shame, and they don’t have pure conduct. Outwardly, they praise themselves: ‘We know the true dhamma’, how’s that the true dhamma? They stand in such a place, like prostitutes.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Bhikkhunīs shouldn’t stand in such a place.”

<lzh>時六群比丘尼以牙骨揩摩身作光澤，比丘白佛，佛言：「不應爾。」六群比丘尼，以細末藥揩摩身光澤，佛言：「不應爾。」彼摩身毛令卷，佛言：「不應爾。」彼剪身毛，佛言：「不應爾。」彼比丘尼持衣纏腰欲令細好，佛言：「不應爾。」彼比丘尼著女人衣，佛言：「不應著。」彼比丘尼著男子衣，佛言：「不應著，聽比丘尼著比丘尼衣。」比丘尼以多衣纏體欲令廣好，佛言：「不應爾。」彼不好著衣欲令身現，佛言：「不應爾。」彼腰帶頭作鳥䋙，佛言：「不應爾。」彼作蔓陀羅腰帶，佛言：「不應爾。」彼畜鞞(語卑反音)樓腰帶，佛言：「不應畜。」彼畜娑腰帶，佛言：「不應畜。」彼散線帶繫腰，佛言：「聽比丘尼編織作帶繞腰一周，若圓織者聽再周。」</lzh>
(DgKd28) Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs massaged their bodies with ivory and bones to make them shiny. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” The group-of-six bhikkhunīs massaged their bodies with powdered medicines to make them shiny. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” Then they rubbed their body hairs to make them curl. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They cut their body hair. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” The bhikkhunīs took robes and bound their hips, wanting to become thin and beautiful. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” The bhikkhunīs wore women’s clothes. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t wear that.” The bhikkhunīs wore men’s clothes. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t wear that. I allow the bhikkhunīs to wear bhikkhunī robes.” The bhikkhunīs put many robes on their bodies, wanting to make them bulky and beautiful. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They didn’t wear their robes properly, wanting to reveal their bodies. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They made the ends of their belts into a bird’s harness. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They made mandāra (flower) belts. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They kept vilīva (bamboo strip) belts. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They kept belts for dancing. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t keep that.” They bound belts with separated strings around their hips. The Buddha said: “I allow a bhikkhunī to weave a belt and to wind it around the hips once. If she weaves it roundly, I allow to wind it around once more.”

<lzh>比丘尼至女人浴處浴，時有賊女婬女語比丘尼言：「汝等年少腋下始有毛，何得便修梵行？汝今可及時行欲樂，後悔何及，老時可修梵行，如是始終無失。」時年少比丘尼聞，便心生厭離不樂佛法。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在女人浴處浴。」彼比丘尼在白衣男子邊浴，諸居士見皆共譏嫌言：「此比丘尼，無有慚愧不修梵行，自稱：『我知正法。』云何在白衣男子邊浴？如賊女婬女無異，如是何有正法？」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在白衣男子邊浴。」</lzh>
(DgKd29) The bhikkhunīs went to the women’s bathing place to bathe. Then there were female criminals and prostitutes who said to the bhikkhunīs: “You’re young, just beginning to have hair below your armpits. How can you practise celibacy? You can now seize the opportunity to enjoy pleasures. What do you have to regret later? When you’re old you can practise celibacy. Like this you won’t lose out from the beginning to the end.” When the young bhikkhunīs heard this, disenchantment and dissatisfaction with the Buddha’s dhamma arose in their minds. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunī shouldn’t bathe at the women’s bathing place.” Then the bhikkhunīs bathed side by side with lay men. When the householders saw this, they were all upset and said: “These bhikkhunīs have no shame, they don’t practise celibacy. They praise themselves: ‘We know the true dhamma’, why do they bathe side by side with lay men? There’s no difference to criminals and prostitutes. How is that the true dhamma?” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunī shouldn’t bathe side by side with lay men.”

<lzh>時有婦女夫出行不在，於餘人邊得娠。彼自墮胎已，往語常教化比丘尼言：「我夫行不在，於餘人邊得娠。我已墮，汝可為我棄之。」答言：「可爾。」彼比丘尼，即以一鉢盛、一鉢覆上，著絡囊中，持在道行。時舍衛長者常作如是願：「若不先與出家人食我終不食，要先與然後食。」彼長者清旦有事欲往餘處，即遣人語言：「汝往道路街巷見出家人將來。」時使人受教已，即往出外求覓，見比丘尼語言：「阿姨來與汝食。」比丘尼言：「止！止！便為供養我已。」彼言：「不爾，但來我當與食。」比丘尼言：「止！止！不須。」彼使即強將比丘尼至家內。家內使人言：「過鉢來與汝食。」彼比丘尼言：「止止！便為供養已。」復言：「出鉢，當與汝食。」彼復言：「不須。」即強奪取鉢，見鉢中有新墮胎，長者見已譏嫌言：「比丘尼不知慚愧、不修梵行，外自稱言：『我知正法。』如是何有正法？自墮胎而棄之，如似賊女婬女無異。」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「白衣家有死者，比丘尼不應為棄。若比丘尼在村內，見乞食比丘，應出鉢示之。」 </lzh>
(DgKd30) Then there was a woman whose husband had gone on a journey and wasn’t there. She became pregnant from another man. When she had aborted the fetus, she went and said to a bhikkhunī who often gave her teachings: “My husband has gone on a journey and isn’t here. I’ve become pregnant from another man. I’ve already aborted it, please throw it away for me.” She answered: “Okay.” The bhikkhunī then put it in a bowl, covered it with another bowl, put them into a bag, took it, and walked on a road. Then a householder in Sāvatthī always made this vow: “If I don’t give food to a renunciate first, I also won’t eat. I must first give and then eat.” The householder had something to do at dawn and wanted to go to another place. So they sent someone and told them: “Go to the paths, streets, and roads. If you see a renunciate, take them here.” When the messenger had received the instruction, they went outside and searched. They saw the bhikkhunī and said: “Venerable, come, we’ll give you food.” The bhikkhunī said: “Enough, enough. I’ve already been offered.” They said: “No, that’s not true, just come, we’ll give you food.” The bhikkhuni said: “Enough, enough, there’s no need.” The messenger then took her by force into the house. Inside the house the messenger said: “Hand over your bowl, we’ll give you food.” The bhikkhunī said: “Enough, enough, it has already been offered.” They said again: “Take out your bowl, we’ll give you food.” And she said again: “There’s no need.” Then they snatched the bowl by force and saw that inside the bowl there was a newly aborted fetus. When the householder saw it, they were upset and said: “This bhikkhunī knows no shame, she doesn’t practise celibacy. Outwardly, she praises herself: ‘I know the true dhamma’, how is that the true dhamma? She aborted a fetus and throws it away. There’s no difference to criminals and prostitutes.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “If someone died in a lay house, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t throw them away. If a bhikkhunī sees a bhikkhu on almsround in the village, she should take out her bowl and show it to him.”

<lzh>時有白衣病，來至比丘尼住處，須瞻視，白佛，佛言：「聽作方便遣之，若是信樂讚歎佛法僧者，隨比丘尼能可作者使瞻視。」彼後命過，諸比丘尼畏慎不敢棄，白佛，佛言：「聽為住處淨故棄之。」</lzh>
(DgKd31) Then there was a sick lay person. They came to the bhikkhunīs’ residence and needed someone to look after them. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to use skillful means to send them away. If it’s someone who has joyous faith and praises the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, then if the bhikkhunīs are able, they may have them looked after.” They later passed away and the bhikkhunīs were afraid and cautious, and didn’t dare to throw them away. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to throw them away to keep the residence clean.” 

<lzh>爾時王波斯匿，邊國反叛人民散亂，時六群比丘尼在彼有疑恐怖處人間遊行。時諸賊伴見已作如是言：「此比丘尼，是王波斯匿所敬愛，我等寧可妻弄之。」時諸居士見已皆共譏嫌：「比丘尼無有慚愧，外自稱言：『我知正法。』如是何有正法？云何乃在有疑恐怖處人間遊行，如似賊女婬女無異？」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在邊國有疑恐怖處人間遊行。」</lzh>
(DgKd32) Then the border countries rebelled against king Pasenadi and the people were disturbed. The group-of-six bhikkhunīs wandered among the people there in a dubious, frightening place. When the gang of bandits saw them, they said: “These bhikkhunīs are revered and loved by King Pasenadi. Why don’t we rape them.” When the householders saw this, they were all upset: “These bhikkhunīs have no shame. Outwardly, they praise themselves: ‘We know the true dhamma’, how is that the true dhamma? Why do they wander among the people in a dubious, frightening place? There’s no difference to criminals and prostitutes.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Bhikkhunīs shouldn’t wander among the people in a dubious, frightening place in a border country.”

<lzh>爾時比丘尼有阿蘭若住處，比丘有聚落住處，欲共貿易。白佛，佛言：「聽貿易。」時比丘尼有阿蘭若住處，居士有聚落間住處，欲共貿易。白佛，佛言：「聽令淨人貿易。」</lzh>
(DgKd33) Then the bhikkhunīs had a residence in the wilderness and the bhikkhus had a residence in a village. They wanted to exchange them. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to exchange them.” Then the bhikkhunīs had a residence in the wilderness and householders had a residence in a village. They wanted to exchange them. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to have an attendant exchange them.”

<lzh>爾時有二居士諍住處，彼一居士布施比丘尼僧，尼僧即受。彼一居士即譏嫌言：「此比丘尼不知慚愧多受無厭。外自稱言：『我知正法。』如今何有正法？他共諍住處，而便受之，施主雖無厭而受者當知足。」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「共諍住處不應受。」</lzh>
(DgKd34) Then there were two householders who quarreled in their residence. One of them made an offering to the bhikkhunī sangha, and the bhikkhunī sangha accepted it. Then the other householder was upset and said: “These bhikkhunīs know no shame, and they accept too much without limit. Outwardly, they praise themselves: ‘We know the true dhamma’, how is that the true dhamma? When others quarrel in their residence, they just accept things. Even though the donor has no limit, the recipients should know moderation.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You shouldn’t accept things from residences where people quarrel.”

<lzh>爾時摩訶波闍波提比丘尼，王園中有比丘尼住處，欲於中夏安居，畏慎不敢，世尊有教比丘尼不應在阿蘭若處住，然王園中比丘尼住處牢固。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「除王園中比丘尼住處，餘阿蘭若處不應住。」</lzh>
(DgKd35) Then there was a bhikkhunī residence in the king’s park and Mahāpajāpatī bhikkhunī wanted to spend the rains retreat there. She was afraid and cautious, and didn’t dare to do it. The World-honored One had taught that bhikkhunīs shouldn’t stay in the wilderness, but the bhikkhunī residence in the king’s park was secure. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “Except for the bhikkhunī residence in the king’s park, you shouldn’t stay in other wildernesses.”

<lzh>時有比丘尼，不往教授處。白佛，佛言：「應往。」時有比丘尼，有佛法僧事，有病比丘尼所須，白佛，佛言：「聽與欲去。」</lzh>
(DgKd36) Then there was a bhikkhunī who didn’t go to the place of instruction. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You should go.” Then there were bhikkhunīs who had matters of the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha, and who had (to attend to) the needs of sick bhikkhunīs. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow that you give consent and leave.”

<lzh>時迦留陀夷，罵打比丘尼、若唾若華擲水灑、若說麁語詭語勸喻
罵者：「令汝道破壞腐爛燒與驢通。」打者，若以手若杖若石。麁語者，說二道若好若惡。詭語者，若男子淨洗浴，以好香塗身，梳治鬚髮，著好華鬘瓔珞嚴身，持孔雀毛蓋，豈更有餘事勝此者也。若女人亦如是。勸喻者，語言：「大姊！汝尚年少，腋下始有毛，何須便爾自毀修梵行為，不如及時五欲自樂，須待老時乃修梵行。」時年少比丘尼，便生厭離心不樂佛法。
時諸比丘尼聞，有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責迦留陀夷言：「云何罵打比丘尼，乃至詭語勸喻耶？」時諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘白佛。佛爾時集比丘僧，以無數方便呵責迦留陀夷：「云何呵罵打比丘尼，乃至詭言勸喻？」時世尊無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：「聽比丘尼僧為迦留陀夷作不為禮白二羯磨。應如是作。眾中應差堪能作羯磨者如上，作如是白：
『大姊僧聽！此迦留陀夷，罵打比丘尼，乃至詭語勸喻。若僧時到僧忍聽，為迦留陀夷作不禮羯磨。白如是。』『大姊僧聽！此迦留陀夷，罵打比丘尼乃至詭言勸喻。今僧為作不禮羯磨。誰諸大姊忍僧為迦留陀夷作不禮羯磨者默然，誰不忍者說。』『僧已忍為迦留陀夷作不禮羯磨竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」
爾時迦留陀夷，隨順比丘尼僧不敢違逆，從比丘尼僧求解不禮羯磨。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「若隨順比丘尼僧不敢違逆，從比丘尼僧乞解不禮羯磨者，比丘尼僧應為解，作白二羯磨。應如是解。眾中應差堪能作羯磨者如上，作如是白：
『大姊僧聽！此迦留陀夷，比丘尼僧為作不禮羯磨，隨順比丘尼僧不敢違逆。今從比丘尼僧乞解不禮羯磨。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧今為解不禮羯磨。白如是。』『大姉僧聽！此迦留陀夷，比丘尼僧為作不禮羯磨，隨順比丘尼僧不敢違逆，從比丘尼僧乞解不禮羯磨。僧今為迦留陀夷解不禮羯磨。誰諸大姊忍僧為迦留陀夷解不禮羯磨者默然，誰不忍者說。』『僧已忍為迦留陀夷解不禮羯磨竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」</lzh>
(DgKd37) Then Kāḷudāyī abused and beat a bhikkhunī, and he spat at her, sprinkled her with flower-watering water, spoke rude words, deceitful words, and advised her. 

<lzh>“</lzh>
Abusing” means: “May your vagina be destroyed, rot, burn, and be penetrated by a donkey.” 

<lzh>“</lzh>
Beating” means with the hand, with a staff, or with a stone. 

<lzh>“</lzh>
Rude words” means talking about whether her private parts are good or bad.

<lzh>“</lzh>
Deceitful words” means: “If a man bathes and is clean, applies nice perfumes on his body, combs and grooms his beard and hair, adorns his body with beautiful flower garlands and ornaments, and takes a peacock-feathered umbrella, how could there be other things more superior than this?” For women also the same.

<lzh>“</lzh>
Advising” means saying: “Venerable sister, you’re still young, just beginning to have hair below your armpits. Why do you need to be so self-deprecating to practise celibacy and don’t seize the opportunity to enjoy the five pleasures for yourself? You should wait until you’re old and then practise celibacy.” 
Then disenchantment arose in the young bhikkhunī’s mind and she was dissatisfied with the Buddha’s dhamma.
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked Kāḷudāyī: “Why did you abuse and beat a bhikkhunī, … speak deceitful words, and advise her?” Then the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha then gathered the bhikkhu sangha and criticized Kāḷudāyī in countless ways: “Why did you criticize, abuse, and beat a bhikkhunī, … speak deceitful words, and advise her?” When the World-honored One had criticized him in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “I allow that the bhikkhunī sangha carry out a formal act with a motion as second for not paying respect to Kāḷudāyī. They should carry it out as follows: In the sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows:

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Kāḷudāyī abuses and beats bhikkhunīs, … speaks deceitful words, and advises them. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to carry out the formal act of not paying respect to Kāḷudāyī. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Kāḷudāyī abuses and beats bhikkhunīs, … speaks deceitful words, and advises them. The sangha now carries out the formal act of not paying respect. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha carries out the formal act of not paying respect to Kāḷudāyī should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak.’ ‘The sangha has accepted to carry out the formal act of not paying respect to Kāḷudāyī. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”
Then Kāḷudāyī complied with the bhikkhunī sangha and didn’t dare to disobey. He asked the bhikkhunī sangha to be released from the formal act of not paying respect. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “If he complies with the bhikkhunī sangha and doesn’t dare to disobey, and asks the bhikkhunī sangha to be released from the formal act of not paying respect, the bhikkhunī sangha should release him with a formal act with a motion as second. They should release him as follows: In the sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows: 

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Kāḷudāyī, for whom the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out a formal act of not paying respect, complies with the bhikkhunī sangha and doesn’t dare to disobey. He now asks the bhikkhunī sangha to be released from the formal act of not paying respect. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now releases him from the formal act of not paying respect. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Kāḷudāyī, for whom the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out a formal act of not paying respect, complies with the bhikkhunī sangha and doesn’t dare to disobey. He asks the bhikkhunī sangha to be released from the formal act of not paying respect. The sangha now releases Kāḷudāyī from the formal act of not paying respect. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha releases Kāḷudāyī from the formal act of not paying respect should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak.’ ‘The sangha has accepted to release Kāḷudāyī from the formal act of not paying respect. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”

<lzh>時六群比丘，至比丘尼住處，共六群比丘尼共住，更相調弄、或共唄、或共哭、或共戲笑，亂諸坐禪比丘尼。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽遮彼。」便一切遮，不聽入比丘尼住處，佛言：「不應一切遮，應隨亂鬧處遮。若都亂住處，應一切遮。」</lzh>
(DgKd38) Then the group-of-six bhikkhus went to the bhikkhunī residence, and stayed together with the group-of-six bhikkhunīs, and they fooled around, sang, cried, and amused themselves together, and disturbed the bhikkhunīs sitting in meditation. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to bar them.” They just barred them altogether and didn’t allow them to enter the bhikkhunī residence. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t bar them altogether, you should bar them from the places where they disturb you. If they disturb in the whole residence, you should bar them altogether.”

<lzh>時六群比丘尼，來至比丘僧住處，共六群比丘，更相調弄、或共唄、或共哭、或共戲笑，白佛，佛言：「聽遮彼。」便一切遮，佛言：「不應一切遮，應隨亂鬧處遮。若都亂住處，應一切遮。」</lzh>
(DgKd39) Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs came to the bhikkhu sangha’s residence, and together with the group-of-six bhikkhus, they fooled around, sang, cried, and amused themselves. They told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to bar them.” They just barred them altogether. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t bar them altogether, you should bar them from the places where they disturb you. If they disturb in the whole residence, you should bar them altogether.”

<lzh>時六群比丘沙彌，來至比丘尼住處，共六群比丘尼、沙彌尼、式叉摩那共住更相調弄、或共唄、或共哭、共戲笑，亂諸坐禪比丘尼。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「聽喚來謫罰。若不改，應為彼沙彌和尚阿闍梨作不禮羯磨。」</lzh>
(DgKd40) Then the sāmaṇeras of the group-of-six bhikkhus came to the bhikkhunī residence and stayed together with the sāmaṇerīs and sikkhamānās of the group-of-six bhikkhunīs, and they fooled around, sang, cried, and amused themselves together, and disturbed the bhikkhunīs sitting in meditation. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to summon and punish them. If they don’t change, you should carry out a formal act of not paying respect to these sāmaṇeras’ preceptors and teachers.”

<lzh>時六群比丘尼、沙彌尼、式叉摩那，來至寺內，共六群比丘沙彌共住，更相調弄、或共唄、或共哭或共戲笑亂諸坐禪比丘。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「應喚來謫罰。若不改，應為沙彌尼和尚阿闍梨作捨教授羯磨。」</lzh>
(DgKd41) Then the sāmaṇerīs and sikkhamānās of the group-of-six bhikkhunīs came to the monastery and stayed together with the sāmaṇeras of the group-of-six bhikkhus, and they fooled around, sang, cried, and amused themselves together, and disturbed the bhikkhus sitting in meditation. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “I allow to summon and punish them. If they don’t change, you should carry out a formal act of exclusion from instruction for these sāmaṇerīs’ preceptors and teachers.

<lzh>時去比丘尼住處不遠，有渠流通水，比丘尼以道在下承流覺樂有疑，諸比丘白佛，佛言：「不犯波羅夷，犯偷蘭遮。比丘尼不應以道承水流。」</lzh>
(DgKd42) Then not far from the bhikkhunī residence there was a drain with flowing water. Bhikkhunīs made the flow touch them below their vagina and felt pleasure. They had doubts. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You haven’t committed a pārājika, you’ve committed a thullaccaya. A bhikkhunī shouldn’t make flowing water touch her vagina.”

<lzh>時難陀比丘尼至華樹下經行處，有賊將去婬弄，彼有疑，以此因緣白佛。佛問言：「難陀！汝覺樂不？」答言：「如似熱鐵入體。」佛言：「無犯。比丘尼不應獨至如是經行處。」</lzh>
(DgKd43) Then Nandā bhikkhunī went to a walking meditation place below some flowering trees. Criminals abducted and raped her. She had doubts and for this reason spoke with the Buddha. The Buddha asked her: “Nandā, did you feel pleasure?” She answered: “It was like hot iron entering my body.” The Buddha said: “There’s no offense. A bhikkhunī shouldn’t go to such a walking meditation place alone.”

<lzh>爾時蓮華色比丘尼阿蘭若處經行，此比丘尼顏貌端正，有年少婆羅門見繫心在彼，即捉欲犯。比丘尼言：「放我當往某處。」彼即放，蓮華色比丘尼至彼處，即以屎塗身，彼婆羅門瞋，以石打頭兩眼脫出。蓮華色不憶，有神足後乃知，即以神足力飛往佛所，頭面禮足已却住一面，佛言：「此比丘尼信樂，眼當還復。」即如言還復如故。彼比丘尼有疑，佛言：「無犯。比丘尼不應至阿蘭若處。」</lzh>
(DgKd44) Then Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī did walking meditation in the wilderness. The bhikkhunī was beautiful, and there was a young brahmin who, when he saw her, attached his mind to her. He then grabbed her and wanted to rape her. The bhikkhunī said: “Let me go, I’ll go to the toilet.” He then let her go, and Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī went to the toilet and smeared excrement on her body. The brahmin got angry, and hit her head with a stone so that both her eyes popped out. Uppalavaṇṇā hadn’t remembered that she had psychic powers but later it came to her mind again. Then she flew to the Buddha with her psychic powers, and having paid respect with her head at his feet, she stood at one side. The Buddha said: “This bhikkhunī has joyous faith, her eyes will return as before.” Then as he spoke, they returned as before. The bhikkhunī had doubts. The Buddha said: “There’s no offense. A bhikkhunī shouldn’t go to the wilderness.”

<lzh>時比丘尼破戒有娠，在懸廁上大小便墮胎在廁中，除糞人見之，譏嫌罵詈言：「比丘尼無有慚愧不修淨行，外自稱言：『我知正法。』如是何有正法？云何墮胎在廁中，如賊女婬女不異？」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在懸廁上大小便。」彼比丘尼有疑，不敢在水上廁大小便，佛言：「聽。」</lzh>
(DgKd45) Then a bhikkhunī had broken the precepts and was pregnant. In an elevated toilet she defecated and urinated and threw the fetus into the toilet. The remover of excrements saw it, was upset, and abused them: “The bhikkhunīs have no shame, they don’t practise pure conduct. Outwardly, they praise themselves: ‘We know the true dhamma’, how’s that the true dhamma? Why do they throw a fetus into the toilet? There’s no difference to criminals and prostitutes.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunī shouldn’t defecate and urinate in an elevated toilet.” The bhikkhunīs had doubts and didn’t dare to defecate and urinate in a toilet built on water. The Buddha said: “I allow it.”

<lzh>時比丘尼結跏趺坐，血不淨出，污脚跟指奇間，行乞食時蟲草著脚，諸居士見皆嗤笑。諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應結跏趺坐。」彼疑不敢半跏趺坐，佛言：「聽半坐。」</lzh>
(DgKd46) Then the bhikkhunīs sat in the lotus posture. Blood and impurities came out and soiled them in between the heels and the toes. When they went on almsround, insects and grass stuck to their feet. When the householders saw it, they all laughed at them. The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunī shouldn’t sit in the lotus posture.” They had doubts and didn’t dare to sit in the half-lotus posture. The Buddha said: “I allow to sit in half-lotus.”

<lzh>爾時世尊在舍衛國。有六群比丘尼，在白衣家內嚮孔中看。時諸居士見已，皆共譏嫌言：「比丘尼無有慚愧，外自稱言：『我知正法。』如是何有正法？云何在他家嚮孔中看，如似賊女婬女不異？」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應在白衣家嚮孔中看。」</lzh>
(DgKd47) At that time, the World-honored One was in Sāvatthī. The group-of-six bhikkhunīs peeked through a hole in a lay house. When the householders saw it, they were all upset and said: “The bhikkhunīs have no shame. Outwardly, they praise themselves: ‘We know the true dhamma’, how’s that the true dhamma? Why do they peek through a hole in someone’s house? There’s no difference to criminals and prostitutes.” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunī shouldn’t peek through a hole in a lay house.”

<lzh>爾時世尊在王舍城。時阿難與大比丘僧五百人俱，在摩竭提人間遊行。時阿難有六十弟子，皆是年少欲還捨戒。時阿難至王舍城，摩訶迦葉遙見阿難來語言：「此眾欲失，汝年少不知足。」阿難言：「大德！我頭白髮已現，云何於迦葉所猶不免年少耶？」迦葉報言：「汝與年少比丘俱，不善閉諸根，食不知足，初夜後夜不能勤修，遍至諸家但行破穀，汝眾當失，汝年少比丘不知足。」偷蘭難陀比丘尼聞彼語，瞋恚不喜作如是言：「摩訶迦葉是故外道，何故數罵阿難言是年少，令彼不悅耶？」
時摩訶迦葉語阿難言：「汝看是比丘尼瞋恚作如是罵我。阿難！唯除世尊！我不憶佛法外更有餘事尊。」阿難言：「大德！懺悔！女人無知。」迦葉再三如是語，阿難亦再三如是言：「懺悔！」夜過已迦葉清旦著衣持鉢至王舍城乞食，時偷蘭難陀比丘尼見唾之。</lzh>
(DgKd48) At that time, the Buddha was in Rājagaha. Ānanda, together with a large bhikkhu sangha of 500 people, was wandering among the Magadhans. Then 60 of Ānanda’s students, who were all young, wanted to disrobe. Ānanda went to Rājagaha. Mahākassapa saw from far that Ānanda was coming and said: “This group is about to be lost. You’re young and don’t know moderation.” Ānanda said: “Venerable, white hair already shows on my head. Why does Kassapa have to compare me with a youth?” Kassapa replied: “You, together with young bhikkhus, whose faculties aren’t well-closed, who don’t know moderation in eating, who can’t strive at the beginning and end of the night, go to houses everywhere and just walk around destroying grain. Your group will be lost. You young bhikkhu don’t know moderation.” Thullanandā bhikkhunī heard his words, and said, angry and displeased: “Mahākassapa is a former non-Buddhist renunciate. Why does he often abuse Ānanda, saying that he’s young, and make him unhappy?”
Then Mahākassapa said to Ānanda: “You see this bhikkhunī angrily abusing me like this. Ānanda, except for the World-honored One, I don’t remember having honored any other thing outside the Buddha’s dhamma.” Ānanda said: “Venerable, repent, the woman has no knowledge.” Kassapa again said this three times, and Ānanda also again said three times: “Repent.” When the night had passed, at dawn, Kassapa put on his robes, took his bowl and went to Rājagaha on almsround. Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī saw him and spat at him.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞，中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責偷蘭難陀言：「云何乃唾大德迦葉？」比丘尼白諸比丘，比丘白佛。佛爾時以此事集比丘僧，呵責偷蘭難陀比丘尼言：「汝云何乃唾大德迦葉？」世尊以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：「聽喚來謫罰。若一比丘喚一比丘尼，應往；若不往，應如法治。若一比丘喚二比丘尼、三比丘尼、若僧，應往；若不往，應如法治。二比丘喚一比丘尼，應往；若不往，應如法治。二比丘喚二比丘尼、若三比丘尼、若僧，應往；若不往，應如法治。三比丘喚一比丘尼，應往；若不往，應如法治。三比丘喚二比丘尼、三比丘尼、若僧，應往；若不往，應如法治。僧喚一比丘尼，應往；若不往，應如法治。僧喚二比丘尼、三比丘尼、若僧，應往；若不往，應如法治。」</lzh>
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked Thullanandā: “Why did you spit at the venerable Kassapa?” The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha then for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “Why did you spit at the venerable Kassapa?” When the World-honored One had criticized her in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “I allow to summon and punish her. If a bhikkhu summons a bhikkhunī, she should go. If she doesn’t go, she should be dealt with according to the rule. If a bhikkhu summons two bhikkhunīs, three bhikkhunīs, or the sangha, they should go. If they don’t go, they should be dealt with according to the rule. If two bhikkhus summon a bhikkhunī, she should go. If she doesn’t go, she should be dealt with according to the rule. If two bhikkhus summon two bhikkhunīs, three bhikkhunīs, or the sangha, they should go. If they don’t go, they should be dealt with according to the rule. If three bhikkhus summon a bhikkhunī, she should go. If she doesn’t go, she should be dealt with according to the rule. If three bhikkhus summon two bhikkhunīs, three bhikkhunīs, or the sangha, they should go. If they don’t go, they should be dealt with according to the rule. If the sangha summons a bhikkhunī, she should go. If she doesn’t go, she should be dealt with according to the rule. If the sangha summons two bhikkhunīs, three bhikkhunīs, or the sangha, they should go. If they don’t go, they should be dealt with according to the rule.”

<lzh>時六群比丘聞，作如是言：「我等欲喚比丘尼者便當喚，欲有作者便當作。何以故？世尊有如是語：『一比丘喚一比丘尼，應往；若不往，應如法治。乃至僧亦如是。』」諸比丘白佛，佛言：「應相望前人，不可往不應往。」</lzh>
(DgKd49) When the group-of-six bhikkhus heard this, they said: “When we want to summon the bhikkhunīs, we’ll just sommon them. When we want to have something done, they should just do it. Why? The World-honored One has said: ‘If a bhikkhu summons a bhikkhunī, she should go. If she doesn’t go, she should be dealt with according to the rule. … Same for the sangha.’” The bhikkhus told the Buddha, and the Buddha said: “You should consider this person. If it’s unsuitable to go, you shouldn’t go.”

<lzh-fascicle-end>(尼揵度具足竟)</lzh-fascicle-end>
<en-fascicle-end>The Bhikkhunī Khandhaka is completed.</en-fascicle-end>