MgGd7


<beginchinese>不依比丘不得住安居者。若親里欲請比丘尼安居者。尼應語檀越先請上尊。若言我於彼無敬心正欲請尼。尼應語我亦不去。若為親里欲去者。應自請比丘。到彼已應料理前食後食非時漿安居衣。勿令有乏。若親里不與者。當自出己衣鉢中餘供給。若安居中比丘若死若罷道若餘處去。尼不得去。三由延內有僧伽藍者。應通結界。半月應往問布薩。若道路賊難恐怖畏奪命傷梵行。有此等諸難者。至後安居。末應往自恣。若故有眾難者。當語親里。為我請比丘來。來已供給所須前食後食及非時漿。勿令有乏。自恣已應還本處。若比丘尼欲住安居處。無比丘不得住安居。若住安居者。越敬法。是名無比丘住處比丘尼不得安居。第七敬法竟。<endchinese>

One may not spend the rains retreat unsupported by bhikkhus. If a relative wants to invite a bhikkhunī for the rains retreat, the bhikkhunī should tell the supporter: “Invite a venerable (monk) first.” If they say: “I don’t have respect for them. I truly want to invite the bhikkhunī,” she should say: “I also won’t come.” If she goes there because of her relative’s request, she should invite a bhikkhu herself. When they have arrived there, she should properly arrange breakfast, lunch, the afternoon tonics, and the rains retreat robe without anything lacking. If the relative doesn’t give it, she should herself take surplus from her own robes and bowl and provide it. If the bhikkhu dies, disrobes, or goes to another place during the rains retreat, the bhikkhunī may not go. If there is a monastery within three yojanas, they should connect their territories, and she should go and ask them for the uposatha every half month. If on the road, criminals cause trouble and fear, and she’s afraid that she’d be killed or raped, if there is such trouble, she should go for the invitation ceremony at the end of the second rains retreat. If the problems still persist, she should tell the relative: “Invite a bhikkhu to come for me.” When he has come, she should provide for his needs, breakfast, lunch, and the afternoon tonics without anything lacking. After the invitation ceremony, she should return to her previous place. If a bhikkhunī wants to spend the rainy season in a place without bhikkhus, she may not spend the rainy season there. If she spends it there, she transgresses against this rule of respect. This is called “a bhikkhunī may not spend the rains retreat where no bhikkhus are staying.” The seventh rule of respect is finished.