MgGd3


<beginchinese>說罪者。比丘尼不得說比丘實罪非實罪。比丘得說尼實罪。不得說非實罪。尼不得說言醫師比丘犯戒比丘摩訶羅比丘。若親里者得軟語諫不得呵責。若是年少應語。汝今不學待。老當學耶。汝後當教詔弟子。汝不學者後弟子亦當學汝作惡。是故汝應隨順學受經誦經。若比丘尼說比丘。過言醫師比丘犯戒比丘摩訶羅比丘者。越敬法。比丘得說比丘尼實過。不得呵責言剃髮老嫗婬蕩老嫗摩訶梨老嫗。若是親里作非法者。得語言莫作是事。不得呵罵應軟語諫。若年少者應語。汝今不學待老當學耶。汝後當教詔弟子。汝不學者後弟子亦當學汝作惡。是故當受經誦經。若比丘呵罵比丘尼。言剃髮老嫗婬蕩老嫗摩訶梨不善不識恩養者。越毘尼罪。是名比丘尼不得說比丘實罪非實罪。比丘得說比丘尼實罪。是名第三敬法。<endchinese>

Pointing out offenses.
A bhikkhunī may not point out a bhikkhu’s offense, whether it’s true or not. A bhikkhu may point out a bhikkhunī’s true offense, but may not point out an offense if it’s not true. A bhikkhunī may not say: “This bhikkhu is a doctor, this bhikkhu has broken a precept, this bhikkhu is an old man.” If they’re relatives, she may admonish him with gentle words, but may not criticize him. If he’s young, she should say: “You don’t train now. Are you waiting until you’re old to train? You’ll later teach and guide students. If you don’t train, then later your students will also train with you to do the unwholesome. Therefore you should follow the training, and learn and chant the suttas.” If a bhikkhunī speaks with a bhikkhu in a transgressive way: “This bhikkhu is a doctor, this bhikkhu has broken a precept, this bhikkhu is an old man,” she transgresses against this rule of respect. A bhikkhu may point out a bhikkhunī’s true transgressions, but may not criticize her: “Shaven-headed old hag, lustful greedy old hag, decrepit old hag.” If she’s a relative who acts against dhamma, he may say: “Don’t do this.” He may not scold her. He should admonish her with gentle words. If she’s young, he should say: “You don’t train now. Are you waiting until you’re old to train? You’ll later teach and guide students. If you don’t train, then later your students will also train with you to do the unwholesome. Therefore you should learn and chant the suttas.” If a bhikkhu scolds a bhikkhunī: “Shaven-headed old hag, lustful greedy old hag, old woman, unwholesome person who doesn’t know how to nurture compassion,” he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what is called “a bhikkhunī may not point out a bhikkhu’s offense, whether it’s true or not. A bhikkhu may point out a bhikkhunī’s true offense.” This is called the third rule of respect.