MgGd2


<beginchinese>二年學者。<endchinese>

The two-year training.


<beginchinese>滿十八歲女欲於如來法律中受具足者。和上尼應供給所須與。白僧料理。尼眾中能作羯磨人。應作是說。<endchinese>

For an 18 year old woman who wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya, the preceptor should provide everything she needs, and should inform the sangha to make proper arrangements. In the bhikkhunī sangha, someone who can carry out formal acts should say:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。十八歲女某甲。欲於如來法律中受具足。若僧時到。僧某甲欲從僧乞二歲學戒。諸阿梨耶聽。某甲欲從僧乞二歲學戒。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the noble sangha listen. The 18 year old woman So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya. If the right time has come for the sangha, So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” 


<beginchinese>此女人入僧中。應一一頭面禮僧足。禮僧足已胡跪合掌。教作如是言。<endchinese>

That woman then comes into the sangha. She should bow with her head at the sangha’s feet one by one. When she has bowed at the sangha’s feet, she should be instructed to say, kneeling and with joined palms:


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧憶念。我滿十八歲女某甲。欲於如來法律中受具足。我今從僧乞二歲學戒。唯願阿梨耶僧憐愍故。與我二歲學戒。如是三說。<endchinese>

“May the noble sangha remember that I, the 18 year old woman So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya. Now I ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years. May the noble sangha give me the training precepts for two years out of compassion.” Like this, she should speak three times. 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>尼羯磨師應作是說。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲女年滿十八已。從僧乞二歲學戒。若僧時到。僧與某甲二歲學戒。白如是。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲女年滿十八已。從僧乞二歲學戒。僧今與某甲二歲學戒。阿梨耶僧忍與某甲二歲學戒和上尼某甲者默然。若不忍便說。第一羯磨竟。第二第三亦如是說。僧已與某甲二歲學戒竟。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

The master of ceremony should then say: “May the noble sangha listen. The woman So-and-so is 18 years old, and has asked the sangha for the training precepts for two years. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha give So-and-so the two-year-training-precepts. This is the motion. May the noble sangha listen. The woman So-and-so is 18 years old, and has asked the sangha for the training precepts for two years. The sangha now gives So-and-so the training precepts for two years. If the noble sangha accepts to give So-and-so the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor, you should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” A second and third time are recited in the same way. “The sangha has given So-and-so the training precepts for two years. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>是式叉摩尼得二歲學戒已。應隨順行十八事。何等十八。一切大比丘尼下。一切沙彌尼上。於式叉摩尼不淨。於大尼淨。於大尼不淨。於式叉摩尼亦不淨。大尼得與式叉摩尼三宿。式叉摩尼得與沙彌尼三宿。式叉摩尼得與大尼授食。除火淨五生種取金銀及錢。自從沙彌尼受食。尼不得向說波羅夷乃至越毘尼罪。得語不婬不盜不殺不妄語如是等。式叉摩尼。至布薩自恣日入僧中。胡跪合掌作如是言。阿梨耶僧。我某甲清淨。僧憶念持。如是三說而去。後四波羅夷犯者。更從始學十九僧伽婆尸沙已下。若一一犯。隨所犯作突吉羅悔。若破五戒。隨犯日數更學。何等五。非時食。停食食。捉錢金銀。飲酒。著華香。是名十八事。<endchinese>

When that sikkhamānā has received the training precepts for two years, she should follow and practise 18 matters. Which 18? She’s junior to all the full bhikkhunīs, and senior to all the sāmaṇerīs. What is impure for a sikkhamānā may be pure for a full bhikkhunī, what is impure for a bhikkhunī is also impure for a sikkhamānā. A bhikkhunī may spend three nights with a sikkhamānā. A sikkhamānā may spend three nights with a sāmaṇerī. A sikkhamānā may offer food to the bhikkhunīs, except for the five kinds of purifications of living seeds by fire (etc.)<note: Fruits have to be made allowable for consumption by monastics through a procedure that symbolically damages the seeds. This can be done with five methods, one of them being with fire.> and for taking gold, silver, and money.<note: This last part is missing in pācittiya 98.> She may accept food from sāmaṇerīs. Bhikkhunīs may not speak about the pārājikas … the minor vinaya rules to her. They may say: “Don’t have sexual intercourse, don’t steal, don’t kill, don’t lie, and so on.” On the uposatha or the pavāraṇā day, a sikkhamānā should go to the sangha, and she should say kneeling and with joined palms: “Noble sangha, I, So-and-so, am pure. The sangha should remember it.” She should speak like this three times and leave. If she breaks any of the last four pārājikas, she should train again from the beginning. If she breaks any rule from the 19 sanghadisesas down, then she should make a confession for a dukkaṭa. If she breaks the five precepts, her training is extended for as many days as she has broken them. Which five? To eat at the wrong time, to eat stored food, to receive money, gold, or silver, to drink alcohol, to wear flowers and perfumes. These are called the 18 rules.


<beginchinese>是式叉摩尼二歲學戒滿已。欲於如來法律中受具足者。和上尼應白僧乞畜弟子羯磨。尼羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

When that sikkhamānā has completed the two-year training in the precepts, and wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya, her preceptor should inform the sangha, and request the formal act to take on students. The master of ceremony should say: 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。某甲式叉摩尼二歲學戒滿二十欲於如來法律中受具足。若僧時到。僧和上尼某甲欲從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲欲從僧乞畜眾羯磨。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the noble sangha listen. The sikkhamānā So-and-so has completed the two-year training in the precepts, and wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya. If the right time has come for the sangha, her preceptor So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the formal act to take on students. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the formal act to take on students. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>和上尼應胡跪合掌作如是言。阿梨耶僧憶念。是式叉摩尼二歲學戒滿二十欲受具足。我某甲今從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。唯願僧與我畜弟子羯磨。如是至三。<endchinese>

The precepter should say, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the noble sangha remember that this sikkhamānā has completed the two-year training in the precepts, is 20 years old, and wants to receive the full ordination. I, So-and-so, now ask the sangha for the formal act to take on students. May the sangha give me the formal act to take on students.” Like this, she should speak three times.


<beginchinese>羯磨人應作是說。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲式叉摩尼。二歲學戒已滿二十欲於如來法律中受具足。尼某甲已從僧中乞畜弟子羯磨。若僧時到。僧與尼某甲畜弟子羯磨。白如是。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲式叉摩尼。二歲學戒已滿。二十欲於如來法律中受具足。尼某甲已從僧乞畜弟子羯磨。僧今與尼某甲畜弟子羯磨。諸阿梨耶忍與尼某甲畜弟子羯磨者默然。若不忍便說。是第一羯磨。第二第三亦如是說。僧已忍與尼某甲畜弟子羯磨竟。僧忍默然故是事如是持。<endchinese>

The master of ceremony should then say: “May the noble sangha listen. Sikkhamānā So-and-so has completed the two-year training in the precepts, is 20 years old, and wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya. The bhikkhunī So-and-so has asked the sangha for the formal act to take on students. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha give bhikkhunī So-and-so the formal act to take on students. This is the motion. May the noble sangha listen. Sikkhamānā So-and-so has completed the two-year training in the precepts, is 20 years old, and wants to receive the full ordination in the Tathāgata’s dhamma-vinaya. The bhikkhunī So-and-so has asked the sangha for the formal act to take on students. The sangha now gives bhikkhunī So-and-so the formal act to take on students. If the venerables accept to give bhikkhunī So-and-so the formal act to take on students, you should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” A second and third time are recited in the same way. “The sangha has accepted to give bhikkhunī So-and-so the formal act to take on students. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>是式叉摩尼二歲學戒已滿。二十欲於如來法律中受具足者。入僧中先頭面禮僧足。禮僧足已先請和上尼。胡跪合掌作如是言。尊憶念。我某甲從尊乞求和上。尊為我作和上。與我受具足。如是至三。和上尼應語發喜心弟子言。我頂戴持和上尼已。先與求衣鉢。與求眾。與求二戒師。與求空靜處教師。推與眾僧。羯磨師應作是說。此中誰能與某甲空靜處作教師。答言我能。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

That sikkhamānā who has completed the two-year training in the precepts, is 20 years old, and wants to receive the full ordination, comes into the sangha, and first bows with her head at the sangha’s feet. Having bowed at the sangha’s feet, she first invites her preceptor, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the venerable remember, I, So-and-so ask the venerable to be my preceptor. May the venerable act as preceptor for me, and give me the full ordination.” Like this, she should speak three times. The preceptor should say to arouse joy in the student’s mind: “I humbly accept to be your preceptor.” She should first look for robes and a bowl, a quorum, two precept-masters, and instructors in an empty, quiet place. Surveilling the sangha, the master of ceremony should say: “From among these, who could act as instructors for So-and-so in an empty, quiet place?” People answer: “I can.” The master of ceremony should say:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲某甲。能空靜處作教師。諸阿梨耶僧聽。某甲和上尼某甲某甲空靜處作教師。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, So-and-so will be her preceptor, and So-and-so and So-and-so can act as instructors for her in an empty, quiet place. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so is the preceptor, and So-and-so and So-and-so act as instructors for her in an empty, quiet place. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.


<beginchinese>教師應將欲受具足人離眾不近不遠。教有二種若略若廣。云何是略眾僧中當問。汝有當言有。無當言無。云何是廣。善女聽。今是至誠時。是實語時。於諸天世間天魔諸梵沙門婆羅門諸天世人阿修羅若不實者。便於中欺誑。亦復於如來應供正遍知聲聞尼眾中欺誑。此是大罪。今當問汝。有者言有。無者言無父母夫主在不。若言在應問。父母夫主聽不。<endchinese>

The instructors should take the person who wants to receive the full ordination away from the sangha not to close and not too far. There are two kinds of instruction, the abridged one and the detailed one. What is the abridged? “When they ask in the sangha, if something is so, you should say yes. If not, you should say no.” What is the detailed? “Good woman, please listen. Now a time of sincerity has come. This is a time of speaking the truth. In this world with gods, māras, brahmas, renunciates, brahmins, gods, humans, and asuras, if you don’t say the truth, you’ll deceive them all. Moreover, you’ll deceive the bhikkhunī assembly, the disciples of the Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and fully awakened. This is a great offense. Now I’ll ask you. If something is so, you should say yes. If not, you should say no. Are your parents or your husband alive?” If she says: “They’re alive,” one should ask: “Have your parents or your husband allowed it?


<beginchinese>求和上尼未。五衣鉢具不。學戒二歲滿不。作畜眾羯磨未。汝字何等。答言字某。和上尼字誰。答言字某。汝不殺父母不。不殺阿羅漢不。不破僧不。不惡心出佛身血不（佛久已涅槃而故依舊文）不壞比丘淨戒不。非賊盜住不。非越濟人不。不自出家不。本曾受具足不。若言曾受。應語去不得受具足。若言不者應問汝非婢不。非養女不。不負人債不。非兵婦不。非陰謀王家不。汝是女不。非石女不。非爛墮不。非二道通不。非破不。不無乳不。非一乳不。非常血病不。非無血不。非一月常血不。非不能女不。<endchinese>

Have you asked a preceptor? Are your five robes and bowl complete? Have you completed the two-year training in the precepts? Has the formal act to take on a group been carried out? What is your name?” She answers: “My name is So-and-so.” “What is your preceptor’s name?” She answers: “Her name is So-and-so.” “You haven’t killed your parents? You haven’t killed an arahant? You haven’t split the sangha? You haven’t drawn blood from the Buddha’s body with an evil mind?” (It has been a long time since the Buddha’s nibbāna, and this is an old, ancient text.) You haven’t broken a bhikkhu’s pure precepts? You haven’t lived here as a thief? You haven’t gone over to another religious movement? You haven’t gone forth by yourself? Have you previously already received the full ordination?” If she says: “I’ve already received it,” one should say: “Go, you may not receive the full ordination.” If she says: “No,” one should ask: “You’re not a slavewoman? You’re not a pledged woman? You don’t have debts with other people? You’re not a soldier? You haven’t conspired against the king’s court? Are you a woman? You don’t have an underdeveloped vagina? Your private parts are not rotting and decomposing? Your vagina and anus are not fused? They aren’t defective? You’re not without breasts? You don’t have just one breast? You don’t menstruate constantly? You’re not without menstruation? In one month, you don’t menstruate often? You’re not an impotent woman?


<beginchinese>汝無如是種種諸病著身不。癬疥黃爛癩病癰痤痔病不。禁黃病瘧病謦欬消盡癲狂熱病風腫水腫腹腫如是種種。更有餘病著身不。答言無。教師來入僧中白言。某甲問已訖。自說清淨無遮法。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

You don’t have all kinds of diseases like these in your body, do you: Scabies, festering sores, leprosy, abscesses, persistent hemorrhoids, jaundice, malaria, cough, tuberculosis, epilepsy, fever, swellings due to air or liquid, swellings in the abdomen, or similar kinds of diseases? Do you still have other diseases in your body?” She answers “no”. The instructors go back to the sangha, and inform them: “So-and-so has been fully asked. She says that she’s pure and without obstructive states.” The master of ceremony should say:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。某甲已空靜處教問訖。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲聽入僧中。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲和上尼某甲聽入僧中。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. So-and-so has been fully taught and questioned in an empty, quiet place. If the right time has come for the sangha, may So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, be allowed to come into the sangha. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, is allowed to come into the sangha. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>此人入僧中。一一頭面禮僧足。在戒師前胡跪合掌授與衣鉢。此鉢多羅應量受用乞食器我受持。如是三說。此是僧伽梨。此是欝多羅僧。此是安陀會。此是覆肩衣。此是雨衣。此是我五衣。此五衣盡壽不離宿受持。如是三說。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

That person comes into the sangha. She should bow with her head at the sangha’s feet one by one. Before the precept-masters, kneeling and with joined palms, she should be given the robes and the bowl. (She says:) “This almsbowl according to measure is used as the utensil on almsround. I determine it.” Like this, she should speak three times. “This is the saṅghāṭī, this is the uttarāsaṅga, this is the antaravāsaka, this is the shoulder-covering robe, and this is the bathing robe. These are my five robes. I won’t spend the night away from these five robes for my whole life. I determine them.” Like this, she should speak three times. The master of ceremony should say: 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。某甲已空靜處教問訖。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲。欲從僧乞受具足。諸阿梨耶聽。某甲和上尼。某甲欲從僧乞受具足。僧忍默然故是事如是持。羯磨師應教乞。阿梨耶僧聽。我某甲從和尚尼某甲受具足。阿闍梨某甲已空靜處教問訖。我某甲和上尼某甲。今從僧乞受具足。唯願僧哀愍故與我受具足。如是至三。羯磨師應作是說。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。某甲已空靜處教問訖已。從僧乞受具足。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中問遮法。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中問遮法。僧忍默然故是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. So-and-so has been fully taught and questioned in an empty, quiet place. If the right time has come for the sangha, So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, wants to ask the sangha for the full ordination. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, wants to ask the sangha for the full ordination. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” The master of ceremony should then instruct her to ask: “May the noble sangha listen. I, So-and-so, receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. The teachers So-and-so have already fully taught and questioned me in an empty, quiet place. I, So-and-so, with So-and-so as my preceptor, now ask the sangha for the full ordination. May the sangha give me the full ordination out of compassion.” Like this, she should speak three times. The master of ceremony should say: “May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. So-and-so has been fully taught and questioned in an empty, quiet place, and asks the sangha for the full ordination. If the right time has come for the sangha, I want to ask So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, about the obstructive states in the midst of the sangha. May the noble sangha listen. I want to ask So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, about the obstructive states in the midst of the sangha. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>善女聽今是至誠時。是實語時。乃至如是種種更有餘病著身不。答言無。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

“Good woman, please listen. Now a time of sincerity has come, a time of speaking the truth. … or similar kinds of diseases. Do you still have other diseases in your body?” She answers “no”. The master of ceremony should say: 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。某甲已空靜處教問訖已從僧乞受具足。父母夫主已聽。已求和上五衣鉢具。是女人二歲學戒滿已。作畜眾羯磨。自說清淨無遮法。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中說三依法。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中說三依法。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. So-and-so has been fully taught and questioned in an empty, quiet place, and asks the sangha for the full ordination. Her parents or husband have allowed it. She has asked a preceptor, and her five robes and bowl are complete. This woman has completed the two-year training in the precepts. The formal act to take on a group has been carried out. She said that she’s pure and without obstructive states. If the right time has come for the sangha, I want to recite the three supports in the midst of the sangha for So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor. May the noble sangha listen. I want to recite the three supports in the midst of the sangha for So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>善女聽。此是如來應供正遍知欲饒益故。於聲聞尼眾中正說制三依。若堪忍直心善女人與受具足。不堪忍者不與受具足。何等三。糞掃衣少事易得應淨無諸過。比丘尼隨順法。依是出家受具足。得作比丘尼。此中盡壽能堪忍持糞掃衣不。答言能。若長得欽婆羅衣［疊＊毛］衣芻摩衣俱舍耶衣舍那衣麻衣軀牟提衣。<endchinese>

“Good woman, please listen. These are the three supports that the Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and fully awakened, wishing to benefit us, has correctly explained and laid down for his disciples in the bhikkhunī sangha. If she has a mind that is enduring and straight, a good woman may be given the full ordination. If she doesn’t endure, she may not be given the full ordination. Which three? A rag robe is a small thing, easy to obtain, fitting, without faults, appropriate for a bhikkhunī. Relying on this, one may go forth, receive the full ordination, and accomplish becoming a bhikkhunī. In this respect, can you endure to wear rag robes for your whole life?” She answers: “I can.” “Additionally, woolen robes, cotton robes, linen robes, silk robes, sunn hemp robes, hemp robes, and woven-linen robes are allowed.”


<beginchinese>依乞食少事易得應淨無諸過。比丘尼隨順法。依是出家受具足。得作比丘尼此中盡壽能堪忍乞食不。答言能。若長得半月食八日十四日十五日說戒食籌食請食。<endchinese>

Relying on almsfood is a small thing, easy to obtain, fitting, without faults, appropriate for a bhikkhunī. Relying on this, one may go forth, receive the full ordination, and accomplish becoming a bhikkhunī. In this respect, can you endure going on almsround for your whole life?” She answers: “I can.” “Additionally, half-monthly meals, meals on the eighth day, on the fourteenth day, and on the fifteenth day, when the precepts are recited, meals by drawing lots, and meals by invitation are allowed.”


<beginchinese>依陳棄藥少事易得應淨無諸過。比丘尼隨順法。依是出家受具足。得作比丘尼。是中盡壽能堪忍服陳棄藥不。答言能。若長得酥油蜜石蜜生酥及脂。依此三聖種當隨順學。<endchinese>

Relying on fermented urine as medicine is a small thing, easy to obtain, fitting, without faults, appropriate for a bhikkhunī. Relying on this, one may go forth, receive the full ordination, and accomplish becoming a bhikkhunī. In this respect, can you endure to take fermented urine as medicine for your whole life?” She answers: “I can.” “Additionally, ghee, oil, honey, sugar, butter, and fat are allowed. Relying on these three noble things, you should follow the training.”




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。某甲已空靜處教問訖已。從僧乞受具足。父母夫主已聽。已求和上尼五衣鉢具。是女人二歲學戒滿已。作畜弟子羯磨。自說清淨無遮法。已堪忍三依若僧時到。僧與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲。白如是。阿梨耶僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。某甲已空靜處教問訖已。從僧乞受具足。父母夫主已聽。已求和上五衣鉢具。是女人二歲學戒滿已。作畜弟子羯磨。自說清淨無遮法。已堪忍三依。僧今與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲。諸阿梨耶忍與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲。忍者僧默然。若不忍便說。是第一羯磨。第二第三亦如是說。僧已與某甲受具足竟。和上尼某甲。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. She has been fully taught and questioned in an empty, quiet place, and has asked the sangha for the full ordination. Her parents or husband have allowed it. She has asked a preceptor, and her five robes and bowl are complete. This woman has completed the two-year training in the precepts. The formal act to take on students has been carried out. She said that she’s pure and without obstructive states. She endures the three supports. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion. May the noble sangha listen. So-and-so receives the full ordination from So-and-so. She has been fully taught and questioned in an empty, quiet place, and has asked the sangha for the full ordination. Her parents or husband have allowed it. She has asked a preceptor, and her five robes and bowl are complete. This woman has completed the two-year training in the precepts. The formal act to take on students has been carried out. She said that she’s pure and without obstructive states. She endures the three supports. The sangha now gives the full ordination to So-and-so with So-and-so as her preceptor. May the venerables accept to give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. If you accept this, the sangha should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” A second and third time are recited in the same way. “The sangha has given So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>善女聽。汝已受具足。一白三羯摩無遮法和合僧十眾。汝今當敬重於佛敬重於法敬重於僧。敬重和上敬重阿闍梨。汝已遭遇人身難得佛世難值聞法亦難眾僧和合意願成就難。已得具足當隨順學。如無憂華離於塵水。汝當依倚修習泥洹善法。得具足此戒序法。八波羅夷。十九僧伽婆尸沙。三十尼薩耆波夜提。百四十一波夜提。八波羅提提舍尼眾學法。七滅諍法隨順法。我今略說教誡汝。後和上阿闍梨當廣教汝。<endchinese>

Good woman, please listen. You’ve received the full ordination, with one motion and three announcements, without obstructive states, by a sangha in harmony, in an assembly of 10 persons. You should now respect the Buddha, respect the dhamma, respect the sangha, respect your preceptor, and respect your teachers. You’ve obtained a human body, which is difficult to obtain, live in a Buddha age, which is difficult to encounter, heard the dhamma, which is also difficult, and your wish has been accomplished in a sangha in harmony, which is difficult. You’ve obtained the full ordination, and should follow the training. Like the Asoka flower separates from dust and water, you should rely on cultivating nibbāna and wholesome states, and fully attain them. These precepts: the introduction, the eight pārājikas, the 19 saṅghādisesas, the 30 nissaggiya pācittiyas, the 141 pācittiyas, the eight pātidesanīyas, the many training rules, the seven rules for settling disputes, and the anudhammas, I’ll now explain briefly to instruct you. Your preceptor and teachers should teach you in detail.”


<beginchinese>受具足已即日和上尼應將到比丘僧所。和上尼應為乞。胡跪合掌作如是言。大德僧憶念。我已與某甲受具足。今從僧乞為某甲受具足。哀愍故與某甲受具足。如是三說。羯磨師應問。比丘尼眾中清淨無遮法不。若不問者越毘尼罪。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

When she has received the full ordination, the preceptor should take her to the bhikkhu sangha on the same day. The preceptor ask, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the venerable sangha remember, I’ve given So-and-so the full ordination. I now ask the sangha to give So-and-so the full ordination. Out of compassion, give So-and-so the full ordination.” Like this, she should speak three times. The master of ceremony should ask: “Is she pure and without obstructive states in the bhikkhunī sangha?” If he doesn’t ask, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. The master of ceremony should say:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。某甲從某甲尼受具足。已比丘尼眾中清淨無遮法。尼某甲已從僧乞受具足。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲。欲從僧乞受具足。諸大德聽。某甲和上尼某甲。欲從僧乞受具足。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the venerable sangha listen. So-and-so has received the full ordination from So-and-so bhikkhunī. She’s pure and without obstructive states in the bhikkhunī sangha. The bhikkhunī So-and-so has asked the sangha to give the full ordination. If the right time has come for the sangha, So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, wants to ask the sangha for the full ordination. May the venerables listen. So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, wants to ask the sangha for the full ordination. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>羯磨師應教胡跪合掌作如是言。大德僧憶念。我某甲從和上尼某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中清淨無遮法。我某甲和上尼某甲。我今從僧乞受具足。唯願僧哀愍故與我受具足。如是至三。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

The master of ceremony should instruct her to say, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the venerable sangha remember. I, So-and-so, have received the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I’m pure and without obstructive states in the bhikkhunī sangha. I, So-and-so, with So-and-so as my preceptor, now ask the sangha for the full ordination. May the sangha give me the full ordination out of compassion.” Like this, she should speak three times. The master of ceremony should say: 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中清淨無遮法。已從僧乞受具足。若僧時到。僧某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中問遮法。諸大德僧聽。某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中問遮法。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the venerable sangha listen. So-and-so has received the full ordination from So-and-so. She’s pure and without obstructive states in the bhikkhunī sangha. She has asked the sangha for the full ordination. If the right time has come for the sangha, I want to ask So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, about the obstructive states in the midst of the sangha. May the venerable sangha listen. I want to ask So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, about the obstructive states in the midst of the sangha. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>羯磨師應問。今是至誠時。是實語時。於諸天世間天魔梵沙門婆羅門諸天世人阿修羅。若不實者。便於中欺誑。亦復於如來應供正遍知二部僧中欺誑。此是大罪。我今僧中當問汝。有者言有。無者言無。父母夫主在不。乃至除女人隱處。餘如上盡問。羯磨師應作是說。<endchinese>

The master of ceremony should ask: “Now a time of sincerity has come, a time of speaking the truth. In this world with gods, māras, brahmas, renunciates, brahmins, gods, humans, and asuras, if you don’t say the truth, you’ll deceive them all. Moreover, you’ll deceive both sanghas of the Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and fully awakened. This is a great offense. Now I’ll ask you in the sangha. If something is so, you should say yes. If not, you should say no. Are your parents or your husband alive?” … Except for the questions about women’s private parts, all other questions are asked as above. The master of ceremony should say:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中問清淨無遮法。已從僧乞受具足。父母夫主已聽。已求和上五衣鉢具。二歲學戒滿已。乞畜眾羯磨竟。自說清淨無遮法。若僧時到。僧某甲和尚尼某甲。我欲於僧中說三依。諸大德聽。某甲和上尼某甲。我欲於僧中說三依。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the venerable sangha listen. So-and-so has received the full ordination from So-and-so. She has been asked in the bhikkhunī sangha if she’s pure and without obstructive states. She has asked the sangha for the full ordination. Her parents or husband have allowed it. She has asked a preceptor, and her five robes and bowl are complete. She has completed the two-year training in the precepts. The formal act to take on a group has been asked for and done. She said that she’s pure and without obstructive states. If the right time has come for the sangha, I want to recite the three supports in the midst of the sangha for So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor. May the venerable sangha listen. I want to recite the three supports in the midst of the sangha for So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.


<beginchinese>善女聽。此是如來應供正遍知欲饒益故。於聲聞尼眾中正說制三依。若堪忍直心善女人與受具足。不堪忍者不與受具足。糞掃衣少事易得應淨無諸過。隨順比丘尼法。依是出家受具足得作比丘尼。是中盡壽能堪忍持糞掃衣不。答言能若長得欽婆羅衣［疊＊毛］衣芻摩衣俱舍耶衣舍那衣麻衣驅牟提衣。如是依乞食依陳棄藥如上廣說。<endchinese>

Good woman, please listen. These are the three supports that the Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and fully awakened, wishing to benefit us, has correctly explained and laid down for his disciples in the bhikkhunī sangha. If she has a mind that is enduring and straight, a good woman may be given the full ordination. If she doesn’t endure, she may not be given the full ordination. A rag robe is a small thing, easy to obtain, fitting, without faults, appropriate for a bhikkhunī. Relying on this, one may go forth, receive the full ordination, and accomplish becoming a bhikkhunī. In this respect, can you endure to wear rag robes for your whole life?” She answers: “I can.” “Additionally, woolen robes, cotton robes, linen robes, silk robes, sunn hemp robes, hemp robes, and woven-linen robes are allowed.” Likewise relying on almsfood, and relying on fermented urine as medicine are as explained in detail above.




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中清淨無遮法。已從僧乞受具足。父母夫主已聽。已求和上五衣鉢具。二歲學戒滿已。作乞畜眾羯磨竟。自說清淨無遮法已堪忍三依。若僧時到。僧與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲白如是。大德僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中清淨無遮法。已從僧乞受具足。父母夫主已聽。已求和上五衣鉢具。二歲學戒滿已。作乞畜眾羯磨竟。自說清淨無遮法。已堪忍三依。僧今與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲。諸大德忍與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲。忍者默然。若不忍便說。是第一羯磨。第二第三亦如是說。僧與某甲受具足竟。和上尼某甲僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

May the venerable sangha listen. So-and-so has received the full ordination from So-and-so. She’s pure and without obstructive states in the bhikkhunī sangha. She has asked the sangha for the full ordination. Her parents or husband have allowed it. She has asked a preceptor, and her five robes and bowl are complete. She has completed the two-year training in the precepts. The formal act to take on a group has been asked for and carried out. She said that she’s pure and without obstructive states. She endures the three supports. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion. May the venerable sangha listen. So-and-so has received the full ordination from So-and-so. She’s pure and without obstructive states in the bhikkhunī sangha. She has asked the sangha for the full ordination. Her parents or husband have allowed it. She has asked a preceptor, and her five robes and bowl are complete. She has completed the two-year training in the precepts. The formal act to take on a group has been asked for and carried out. She said that she’s pure and without obstructive states. She endures the three supports. The sangha now gives So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. May the venerables accept to give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. If you accept this, you should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” A second and third time are recited in the same way. “The sangha has given So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>善女聽。汝已受具足。善受具足。一白三羯磨無遮法和合僧二部眾十眾已上。汝今當敬重於佛敬重於法敬重於僧。敬重和上敬重阿闍梨。汝已遭遇人身難得佛世難值聞法亦難眾僧和合意願成就難。頂禮釋師子及諸聲聞眾已得具足。如無憂華離於塵水。汝當依倚修習泥洹。善法得具足。<endchinese>

Good woman, please listen. You’ve received the full ordination, well received the full ordination, with one motion and three announcements, without obstructive states, by a sangha in harmony, in both assemblies, in an assembly of 10 persons or more. You should now respect the Buddha, respect the dhamma, respect the sangha, respect your preceptor, and respect your teachers. You’ve obtained a human body, which is difficult to obtain, live in a Buddha age, which is difficult to encounter, heard the dhamma, which is also difficult, and your wish has been accomplished in a sangha in harmony, which is difficult. You’ve paid homage to the Sakyan lion and his assembly of disciples, and obtained the full ordination. Like the Asoka flower separates from dust and water, you should rely on cultivating nibbāna and wholesome states, and fully attain them. 




Ordination by messenger


<beginchinese>佛住毘舍離大林重閣精舍。爾時法豫比丘尼弟子欲受具足。時菴婆羅離車童子。聞法豫弟子欲受具足。便作是念。此女於我有如是不饒益事。今若出精舍門者。我當更捉壞其梵行。令不得受具足。法預比丘尼聞已往到世尊所。頭面禮足却住一面白佛言。世尊。我有弟子欲受具足。若出精舍者畏壞梵行彼間住。此間僧得與遙受具足不。佛言得。先比丘尼眾與受具足已。往比丘僧中乞使受具足。尼僧與受具足已。法預即往白比丘僧乞使受具足。羯磨人應作是說。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Vesālī in the great wood, in the two-story monastery. At that time, a student of Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī wanted to receive the full ordination. Then Apraśarka, a young Licchavi, heard that Dhammadinnā’s student wanted to receive the full ordination, and thought: “This woman has done such-and-such a harmful thing to me. Now when she leaves the monastery gate, I’ll grab her and rape her, so she can’t receive the full ordination. When Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī had heard this, she went to the World-honored One, bowed with her head at his feet, stood at one side, and said to the Buddha: “World-honored One, I’ve a student who wants to receive the full ordination. If she leaves the monastery, she fears that she’ll be raped. If she stays there, and the (bhikkhu) sangha is here, may she receive the full ordination from a distance?” The Buddha said: “She may. When the bhikkhunī sangha has first given the full ordination, you should go to the bhikkhu sangha to ask for the full ordination by messenger.” When the bhikkhunī sangha had given the full ordination, Dhammadinnā went and informed the bhikkhu sangha that she asks for the full ordination by messenger. The master of ceremony should say: 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。法預比丘尼弟子某甲欲受具足。若來者畏傷梵行。若僧時到。僧法預比丘尼弟子某甲。欲從僧乞使受具足。諸大德僧聽。法預比丘尼弟子某甲欲乞使受具足。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the venerable sangha listen. Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī’s student So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination. If she came, she’d fear to be raped. If the right time has come for the sangha, Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī’s student So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the full ordination by messenger. May the venerable sangha listen. Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī’s student So-and-so wants to ask the sangha for the full ordination by messenger. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>和上尼應僧中胡跪合掌作如是言。大德僧憶念。我法預比丘尼弟子某甲欲受具足。若來者畏傷梵行。已比丘尼眾中受具足無遮法。我某甲為弟子某甲乞使受具足。唯願大德僧哀愍故。與我弟子某甲使受具足。如是至三。僧中應羯磨堪能者若二若三不得羯磨眾。羯磨人應作是說。<endchinese>

The preceptor should say in the midst of the sangha, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the venerable sangha remember. The student So-and-so of me, Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī, wants to receive the full ordination. If she came, she’d fear to be raped. She has received the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha, and is without obstructive states. I, So-and-so, ask on behalf of my student So-and-so for the full ordination by messenger. May the venerable sangha give my student So-and-so the full ordination by messenger out of compassion.” Like this, she should speak three times. In the sangha, two or three capable persons should (be appointed) by a formal act. It’s not allowed (to appoint) a (larger) group by a formal act. The master of ceremony should say: 




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。法預比丘尼弟子某甲欲受具足。已比丘尼眾中受具足無遮法。若來者畏傷梵行。法預比丘尼為弟子某甲。已從僧乞使受具足。若僧時到。僧今羯磨。某甲某甲比丘為法預弟子某甲受具足。白如是。大德僧聽。法預比丘尼為弟子某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中受具足無遮法。若來者畏傷梵行。法預比丘尼為弟子某甲。已從僧乞使受具足。僧今羯摩。某甲某甲比丘使為法預比丘尼弟子某甲受具足。諸大德忍羯磨某甲某甲比丘使為法預比丘尼弟子某甲受具足者默然。若不忍便說。是初羯磨。第二第三亦如是說。僧已羯磨某甲某甲比丘使為法預比丘尼弟子某甲受具足竟。僧忍默然故。是事如是持。<endchinese>

“May the venerable sangha listen. Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī’s student So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination. She has received the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha, and is without obstructive states. If she came, she’d fear to be raped. Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī has asked the sangha on behalf of her student So-and-so for the full ordination by messenger. If the right time has come for the sangha, the sangha now (appoints) bhikkhus So-and-so and So-and-so by a formal act to give the full ordination to bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā’s student So-and-so. This is the motion. May the venerable sangha listen. Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī has given the full ordination to her student So-and-so. She has received the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha, and is without obstructive states. If she came, she’d fear to be raped. Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī has asked the sangha on behalf of her student So-and-so for the full ordination by messenger. The sangha now (appoints) bhikkhus So-and-so and So-and-so by a formal act as messengers to give the full ordination to bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā’s student So-and-so. If the venerables accept (to appoint) bhikkhus So-and-so and So-and-so by a formal act as messengers to give the full ordination to bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā’s student So-and-so, you should remain silent. If you don’t accept this, you should speak. This is the first announcement.” A second and third time are recited in the same way. “The sangha (has appointed) bhikkhus So-and-so and So-and-so by a formal act as messengers to give the full ordination to bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā’s student So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”


<beginchinese>是比丘受羯磨竟即應往比丘尼精舍。受具足人應向使乞。胡跪合掌作如是言。大德僧憶念。我某甲從和上尼某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中受具足清淨無遮法。我若出此間者畏傷梵行此間住。我某甲和上尼某甲。今從僧乞受具足。唯願僧哀愍故與我受具足。如是至三。和上尼應共使到僧中。和上尼應乞。胡跪合掌作如是言。大德僧憶念。我法預比丘尼弟子某甲欲受具足。已比丘尼眾中受具足清淨無遮法。若來者畏傷梵行彼間住。我法預弟子某甲今從僧乞受具足。唯願僧哀愍故與受具足。如是三乞。羯磨人應作是說。<endchinese>

When these bhikkhus have accepted the formal act, they should go to the bhikkhunī monastery. The ordination candidate should ask the messengers, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the venerable sangha remember. I, So-and-so, have received the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I’ve received the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha. I’m pure and without obstructive states. If I went out from here, I fear that I’d be raped. So I stayed here. I, So-and-so, with So-and-so as my preceptor, now ask the sangha for the full ordination. May the sangha give me the full ordination out of compassion.” Like this, she should speak three times. The preceptor should go to the (bhikkhu) sangha together with the messengers. The preceptor should ask, kneeling and with joined palms: “May the venerable sangha remember. The student So-and-so of me, Dhammadinnā bhikkhunī, wants to receive the full ordination. She has received the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha. She’s pure and without obstructive states. If she came, she fears that she’d be raped. So she stayed back. The student So-and-so of me, Dhammadinnā, now asks the sangha for the full ordination. May the sangha to give her the full ordination out of compassion.” Like this, she should speak three times. The master of ceremony should say:




Saṅghakamma


<beginchinese>大德僧聽。某甲從某甲受具足。已比丘尼眾中受具足清淨無遮法。若來者畏傷梵行彼間住。和上尼某甲已從僧乞受具足。若僧時到。僧與某甲受具足。和上尼某甲。白如是。<endchinese>

“May the venerable sangha listen. So-and-so has received the full ordination from So-and-so. She has received the full ordination in the bhikkhunī sangha. She’s pure and without obstructive states. If she came, she fears that she’d be raped. So she stayed back. Her preceptor So-and-so has asked the sangha for the full ordination. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha give So-and-so the full ordination with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion.”


<beginchinese>一白三羯磨已。和上尼共使還至比丘尼精舍。作如是言。善女聽。汝已受具足。一白三羯磨無遮法十眾以上和合二部眾。受具足竟。汝應恭敬三寶。汝已遭遇人身難得佛世難值聞法亦難。是名二歲學戒二部眾中受具足。是名第二敬法。<endchinese>

When one motion and three announcements have been done, the preceptor returns to the bhikkhunī monastery together with the messengers, and says: “Good woman, please listen. You’ve received the full ordination, with one motion and three announcements, without obstructive states, in an assembly of 10 persons or more, in harmony, in both assemblies. Your ordination is completed. You should respect the three jewels. You’ve obtained a human body, which is difficult to obtain, live in a Buddha age, which is difficult to encounter, and heard the dhamma, which is also difficult.” This is called receiving the full ordination in both sanghas after having trained in the precepts for two years. This is called the second rule of respect.