SarvVb_ss14


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有比丘尼名曰迦羅，本是外道，喜鬪諍相言。是比丘尼，共餘比丘尼鬪諍時，作是言：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒，我當從彼修梵行。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī called Kālī, who was formerly a non-Buddhist renunciate, liked to quarrel with others. When this bhikkhunī was quarreling with other bhikkhunīs, she said: “I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them.”

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘，尼鬪諍時作是言：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒，我當從彼修梵行。』」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問迦羅比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，共鬪諍時作是言：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。不但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒，我當從彼修梵行。』」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you, while quarreling, say: ‘I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them’?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Kālī bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you, while quarreling with others, say: ‘I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them’?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 
<lzh>若比丘尼共比丘尼鬪諍時，作是言：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒者，我當從彼修梵行。』諸比丘尼應諫是比丘尼言：『汝莫共諸比丘尼鬪諍時作是言：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒者，我當從彼修梵行。」汝應佛法中樂修梵行，當捨離自不樂心。』是比丘尼，諸比丘尼如是諫時，堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘尼應第二、第三諫令捨是事。若是比丘尼，第二、第三諫時捨者善。若不捨者，是法乃至三諫，僧伽婆尸沙可悔過。」</lzh>


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī, while quarreling with other bhikkhunīs, says: “I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “While quarreling with other bhikkhunīs, don’t say: ‘I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them.’ You should delight in practicing the monastic life in the Buddha’s dhamma, and should abandon your dissatisfied mind.” When that bhikkhunī is admonished by the other bhikkhunīs in this way, and she holds firmly on to this matter and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her a second and a third time to make her give up this matter. If that bhikkhunī gives it up at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that act constitutes a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments, from which one can repent.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>僧伽婆尸沙者，是罪屬僧，僧中有殘，因僧前悔過除滅，是名僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>
“A saṅghādisesa” means this offense is dependent upon the sangha, and in the sangha there’s a remainder. Because she confesses and clears it in front of the sangha, therefore it’s called a saṅghādisesa. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼言：「我捨佛。」偷蘭遮。若言：「捨法。」偷蘭遮。若言：「捨僧。」偷蘭遮。若言：「捨戒。」皆偷蘭遮。若言：「非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒，我當從彼修梵行。」呵眾僧故，得波逸提。諸比丘尼先應軟語約勅，爾時捨者，應教四偷蘭遮、一波逸提悔過出罪。若軟語不捨者，應白四羯磨約勅。約勅法者，僧一心和合，一比丘尼應唱言：「大德尼僧聽！是迦羅比丘尼，先是外道，今共諸比丘尼鬪諍時作如是言：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒，我當從彼修梵行。』已軟語約勅，不捨惡邪。若僧時到僧忍聽，今僧約勅迦羅比丘尼：『汝莫共諸比丘尼鬪諍時作是言：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧、捨戒。非但沙門釋子知道，更有餘沙門、婆羅門有慚愧善好樂持戒，我當從彼修梵行。」』是名白。」如是白四羯磨。「僧約勅某甲比丘尼竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！」如佛先說，是比丘尼，諸比丘尼應約勅，乃至三諫令捨是事者，是名為約勅、是名為教、是名約勅教。若軟語約勅不捨者未犯。初說說未竟說竟、第二說說未竟說竟、第三說說未竟、非法別眾、非法和合眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾、如法別眾、異法異律異佛教，若約勅不捨者未犯。若如法、如律、如佛教，三約勅不捨者，是比丘尼犯僧伽婆尸沙。(第十四事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī says: “I renounce the Buddha,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “I renounce the dhamma,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “I renounce the sangha,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “I renounce the precepts,” all are thullaccayas. If she says: “Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them,” because of the criticism of the sangha, she incurs a pācittiya. The bhikkhunīs should first admonish her with gentle speech. If she gives it up at that time, they should instruct her to confess four thullaccayas and one pācittiya to clear the offenses. If she doesn’t give it up with gentle speech, they should admonish her in a formal act with a motion as fourth. The procedure for admonishing her is as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

When the sangha is unanimous and harmonious, one bhikkhunī should announce: “Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This Kālī bhikkhunī, who formerly was a non-Buddhist renunciate, while quarreling with other bhikkhunīs, said: ‘I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them.’ Having been admonished with gentle speech, she didn’t give up this bad mistake. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now admonishes Kālī bhikkhunī: ‘While quarreling with other bhikkhunīs, don’t say: “I renounce the Buddha, renounce the dhamma, renounce the sangha, and renounce the precepts. Not just the renunciates that are Sakyan children know the path. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who are conscientious, virtuous, and delight in keeping precepts. I’ll practise the monastic life with them.”’ This is called the motion.” Likewise for the formal act with a motion as fourth. “The sangha has admonished bhikkhunī So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” 


<h2>Explanations (continued)</h2>

As the Buddha explained earlier, that bhikkhunī should be admonished by the bhikkhunīs up to three times to make her give up this matter. This is called the admonishment, this is called the instruction, this is called the admonishment and instruction. If she doesn’t give it up when being admonished with gentle speech, the offense isn’t committed yet. If when admonished, she doesn’t give it up when the first announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the second announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the third announcement isn’t finished yet, if it’s against the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it’s against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it’s according to dhamma in a divided assembly, or if it’s according to a different dhamma, a different vinaya, and a different Buddha’s instruction, the offense isn’t committed yet. If it’s according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction, and she doesn’t give it up at the third admonishment, that bhikkhunī commits a saṅghādisesa. (End of rule 14.)
