SarvVb_pc94


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，有共行弟子名施越沙，善好樂持戒，喜忘師教。令舉物時，著異處餘處求，須是物時覓不能得，又時偷蘭難陀比丘尼從聚落還，弟子施越沙往迎，欲代持衣鉢，却身不與。施越沙即瞋，語諸比丘尼言：「我不偷奪，和上尼不信我。」諸比丘尼言：「云何不信？」「師行來還，我於道中迎，欲代持鉢，却身不與。我欲代持衣，又却身不與。」諸比丘尼往語偷蘭難陀比丘尼言：「汝弟子善好持戒，何故不信？」答言：「我云何不信？」諸比丘尼言：「汝弟子欲代汝持鉢，汝却身不與。欲代汝持衣，又却身不與。」偷蘭難陀比丘尼言：「我非不信，是人憙忘，舉物異處便餘處覓，若須物時覓不能得，是故不與。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthi. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī had a student practising with her called Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand. She was virtuous and happy to keep the precepts, but she liked to forget her teacher’s instructions. When (the teacher) made her put things away, she put them in one place, and searched for them in another place. When these things were needed, she searched but wasn’t able to retrieve them. At another time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī returned from the village, and the student Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand went to welcome her and wanted to carry her robes and bowl for her. She stepped back and didn’t give them. Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand then was angry and told the other bhikkhunīs: “I don’t steal, but my precepter doesn’t trust me.” The bhikkhunīs said: “Why doesn’t she trust you?” “My teacher went out and came back, and I welcomed her on the path and wanted to carry her bowl for her, but she sent me away without giving it. I also wanted to carry her robes for her, and she also sent me away without giving them.” The bhikkhunīs went and said to Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “Your student is virtuous and keeps the precepts. Why don’t you trust her?” She answered: “How do I not trust her?” The bhikkhunīs said: “Your student wanted to carry your bowl for you, and you sent her away without giving it. She also wanted to carry your robes for you, and you also sent her away without giving it.” Thullanandā bhikkhunī said: “It’s not that I don’t trust her. This person likes to forget things. She puts things in one place and searches for them in another place. When the things are needed, she searches but isn’t able to retrieve them. For this reason, I didn’t give them to her.”
<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，不審諦看物便嫌恨？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問施越沙比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，不審諦看物便嫌恨？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼不審諦看物便嫌恨，波夜提。」</lzh>

Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you don’t pay attention when looking after things, and just become hostile?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you don’t pay attention when looking after things, and just become hostile?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī doesn’t pay attention when looking after things, and just becomes hostile, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼不審諦看物便嫌恨，波夜提。隨嫌恨，隨得爾所波夜提。(九十四事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī doesn’t pay attention when looking after things, and just becomes hostile, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she’s hostile, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 94.)