SarvVb_pc86


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，惡性喜瞋諸善比丘尼，善比丘尼不喜共住，誑一無智比丘尼言：「汝來共我住，諸所須物我當與汝。」是比丘尼答言：「可爾。」偷蘭難陀比丘尼，喜出入他家多知多識。天雨墮時，早起至他家，從一家復至一家。日沒時衣被皆濕，如阿羅羅鳥，還入房舍作是言：「我脚痛、𨄔痛、脇痛、背痛。」無智比丘尼言：「汝從何來？」答曰：「我從某家出復到某家。」曰：「汝為佛事為僧事耶？」答言：「不為。」「若不為佛事、僧事，何以雨中去？諸白衣多事，尚不於雨中出行。汝不善，汝何以於雨中去？」偷蘭難陀比丘尼言：「汝是我和上阿闍梨耶？何以教我？我前喚汝時，欲使汝教我耶？汝遠出去。」是比丘尼老病無力，偷蘭難陀比丘尼強拽出垂死。</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī had a bad character and liked to be angry with the virtuous bhikkhunīs. The virtuous bhikkhunīs didn’t like to stay together with her. She tricked a bhikkhunī who didn’t know about this: “Come and stay with me. Whatever you need, I’ll give to you.” That bhikkhunī answered: “Okay.” Thullanandā bhikkhunī liked to go in and out of people’s houses, and she had many acquaintances. When it was raining, she got up early, went to someone’s house, and from that house went to another. At sunset, her robes and blankets all wet, like an Aluoluo bird, she returned to her residence and said: “My feet hurt, my calves hurt, my flanks hurt, and my back hurts.” The bhikkhunī who didn’t know said: “Where are you coming from?” She answered: “I went from a certain house to a certain other house.” (The other) said: “Did you attend to matters of the Buddha or the sangha?” She answered: “I didn’t attend to that.” “If you didn’t attend to matters of the Buddha or the sangha, why did you go out in the rain? Even busy lay people don’t go out in the rain. You’re unskillful, why did you go out in the rain?” Thullanandā bhikkhunī said: “Are you my preceptor or teacher? Why do you lecture me? When I summoned you earlier, did I want you to lecture me? Go far away!” That bhikkhunī was old, sick, and without strength. Thullanandā bhikkhunī dragged her out by force, and she nearly died.

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責：「云何名比丘尼，自喚他比丘尼言：『善女來共我住，諸所須物我當與汝。』後瞋拽出？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問偷蘭難陀比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，自喚他比丘尼言：『善女來共我住，諸所須物我當與汝。』後瞋拽出？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼語比丘尼言：『善女來共我房中住。』後瞋不喜，若自拽出、若使人拽出，作如是言：『汝遠滅去，莫此中住。』以是因緣無異者，波夜提。」</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you yourself summon another bhikkhunī: ‘Good woman, come and stay with me. Whatever you need, I’ll give to you’, and later angrily drag her out?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you yourself summon another bhikkhunī: ‘Good woman, come and stay with me. Whatever you need, I’ll give to you’, and later angrily drag her out?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī says to another bhikkhunī: “Good woman, come and stay with me in my room,” but later, angry and dissatisfied, either drags her out herself, or has others drag her out, and says: “Go far away. Don’t stay here,” doing it for this reason and no other, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼瞋不喜，若自拽、若使人拽，皆波夜提。不能拽出者，突吉羅。隨自拽出、隨使人拽，隨得爾所波夜提。不能出者，突吉羅。(八十六事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī, angry and dissatisfied, either drags her out herself, or has others drag her out, both are pācittiyas. If she’s not able to drag her out, it’s a dukkaṭa. Whenever she drags her out herself, or has others drag her out, she incurs a pācittiya. If she’s not able to get her out, it’s a dukkaṭa. (End of rule 86.)