SarvVb_pd1-8


<lzh>八波羅提提舍尼法</lzh>
The eight pātidesanīya rules.


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在釋氏國。爾時釋摩男，請佛及二部僧明日食，佛默然受。知佛默然受已，頭面禮佛足右遶而去。還舍通夜辦種種多美飲食，煮藥草乳汁，早起敷坐處，遣使白佛：「食具已辦，唯聖知時。」佛及二部僧往入其舍就座而坐。釋摩男見佛及二部僧坐已，自手行水、自下飯、與藥草、乳汁澆上。爾時助調達比丘尼，盛滿鉢飯，以藥草乳汁澆上，著前不食四向顧視。釋摩男作是念：「我當遍看，誰少、誰不少？誰食、誰不食？」見助調達比丘尼，置鉢在前不食，問言：「何故不食？」答言：「汝有未煎乳不？有者當食。」答言：「是藥草乳汁美好可食。若有未煎乳者，當以相與。」又問：「汝有酪、生酥、熟酥、油、魚、肉脯者，我當得食。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in the Sakyan country. At that time, Mahānāma invited the Buddha and both sanghas for the next day’s meal. The Buddha accepted in silence. Having understood that the Buddha had accepted in silence, (Mahānāma) paid respect with his head at the Buddha’s feet, circumambulated him on the right side, and left. He returned to his home and prepared all kinds of delicious foods and drinks the whole night, and boiled a milk drink with medicinal herbs. He got up early, laid out seats, and sent a messenger to tell the Buddha: “The food is fully prepared. May the Noble One know the (right) time.” The Buddha and both sanghas went and entered his house, and sat down on the seats. When Mahānāma saw that the Buddha and both sanghas were seated, he brought water with his own hands, himself served the food, and sprinkled the milk drink with medicinal herbs on top. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta had full bowls of food in front of them, with the milk drink with medicinal herbs sprinkled on top, but they weren’t eating, and were looking around. Mahānāma thought: “I’ll have a look everywhere who has little, who has much, who is eating, and who isn’t eating.” He saw the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta with bowls in front of them but not eating, and asked them: “Why aren’t you eating?” They answered: “Do you have unboiled milk? If you have, we’ll eat.” He answered: “This milk drink with medicinal herbs is good and edible. If there’s unboiled milk, I’ll give it to you.” They also asked: “Do you have curds, fresh butter, ghee, oil, fish, meat, and dried meat? We’ll be able to eat that.”
<lzh>語言：「藥草乳汁可並食。若有酪、生酥、熟酥、油、魚、肉脯，當以相與。」助調達比丘尼言：「汝請佛及僧，汝若無力能隨意與者，何故請佛及僧耶？若餘人請者，當隨意與，是熟乳何處無有？」釋摩男善好，聞是語不瞋。餘隨從釋摩男者瞋言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有功德。』是釋摩男供給眾僧如事大家，云何現前呵辱？」</lzh>
He said: “Please also eat the milk drink with medicinal herbs. If there’s curds, fresh butter, ghee, oil, fish, meat, and dried meat, I’ll give them to you.” The bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta said: “You invited the Buddha and the sangha. If you don’t have the means to give according to your intention, why did you invite the Buddha and the sangha? When other people invite us, they give according to their intentions. Which place wouldn’t have this hot milk?” Mahānāma was virtuous and when he heard these words, he wasn’t angry, but the others following him said angrily: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but when Mahānāma supports the sangha as though serving a high-ranking person, why show disdain?”
<lzh>佛見助調達比丘尼作是事，聞諸居士呵責，食後以是事集二部僧，種種因緣呵責助調達比丘尼言：「云何名比丘尼，釋摩男供給眾僧如事大家，云何現前呵辱？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼無病，自為索乳，是比丘尼，應諸比丘尼前說是事，作是言：『諸善女！我墮可呵法，不隨順道，可悔過，我今悔過。』是名初波羅提提舍尼法。」</lzh>
The Buddha saw that the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta were doing this, and heard the criticism of the householders. After the meal, he gathered both sanghas because of this matter, and criticized the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs? Mahānāma supports the sangha as though serving a high-ranking person. Why did you show disdain?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī, who isn’t sick, asks for milk for herself, that bhikkhunī should speak about this matter in front of the bhikkhunīs and say: “Good women, I’ve fallen into an offense to be criticized, not in accordance with the path, to be confessed. I now confess it.” This is called the first pātidesanīya rule.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼無病自為索乳，得者波羅提提舍尼；不得者，突吉羅。為病者索得者，不犯。若從親里索、若先請、若不索自與，不犯。(一事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī, who isn’t sick, asks for milk for herself and obtains it, it’s a pātidesanīya. If she doesn’t obtain it, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she asks for a sick person and obtains it, there’s no offense. If she asks from relatives, if she asks from someone who has given a prior invitation, or if someone gives on their own without her asking, the offense isn’t committed. (End of rule 1.)

<lzh>酪、生酥、熟酥、油、魚、肉、脯亦如是，是名為八波羅提提舍尼法。(不共戒都竟，共戒如比丘戒中廣說。)</lzh>
Likewise for curds, fresh butter, ghee, oil, fish, meat, and dried meat. These are called the eight pātidesanīya rules. (End of the unshared precepts. The shared precepts are as explained in detail in the bhikkhu precepts.)