SarvVb_pc125


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時助調達比丘尼，有大式叉摩尼，可受大戒。施越沙比丘尼，見是大式叉摩尼，即便語言：「汝何不受大戒？」答言：「助調達比丘尼兇惡喜鬪，我不欲從彼受大戒。汝若與我作和上尼者，我當受大戒。」施越沙言：「汝二歲學六法，我當畜汝為眾。」是大式叉摩尼二歲學六法已，語施越沙言：「汝語我：『二歲學六法，我當畜汝為眾。』我已二歲學六法，汝當畜我。」施越沙言：「我不畜汝。何以故？是助調達比丘尼兇惡喜鬪諍，自能傷他、亦能教人作，以是故我不畜汝。」又言：「汝若不能畜我，何以語我二歲學六法？若汝先不語我者，我不二歲學六法。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta had a sikkhamānā who was grown up, eligible for the full ordination. Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand bhikkhunī saw this grown up sikkhamānā, and then said: “Why don’t you take the full ordination?” She answered: “The bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta are fierce and like to quarrel. I don’t want to receive the full ordination from them. If you’d act as my preceptor, I’ll take the full ordination.” Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand said: “Train in the six rules for two years, and I’ll take you on as my student.” When that grown up sikkhamānā had trained in the six rules for two years, she said to Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand: “You told me: ‘Train in the six rules for two years, and I’ll take you on as my student.’ I’ve trained in the six rules for two years. You should take me on.” Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand said: “I won’t take you on. Why? Those bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta are fierce and like to quarrel. They can harm people themselves, and can also instruct others to do it. For this reason, I won’t take you on.” (The sikkhamānā) replied: “If you can’t take me on, why did you tell me to train in the six rules for two years? If you hadn’t said that to me previously, I wouldn’t have trained in the six rules for two years.”

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，語他言：『汝二歲學六法，我當畜汝。』後便不畜？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問是比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，語他言：『汝二歲學六法，我當畜汝。』後便不畜？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與諸比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼語他言：『汝二歲學六法，後當畜汝。』若不畜者，波夜提。」</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you say to someone: ‘Train in the six rules for two years, and I’ll take you on’, but later just don’t take her on?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked that bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you say to someone: ‘Train in the six rules for two years, and I’ll take you on’, but later just don’t take her on?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī says to someone: “Train in the six rules for two years, and then I’ll take you on,” but doesn’t take her on, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼語他言：「汝二歲學六法，我當畜汝。」後便不畜者，波夜提。隨不畜，隨得波夜提。(一百二十五事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī says to someone: “Train in the six rules for two years, and I’ll take you on,” but later just doesn’t take her on, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she doesn’t take her on, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 125.)