SarvVb_pc154


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時佛不在比丘尼僧前結同戒，在比丘僧前結同戒已，語諸比丘：「汝等向比丘尼僧說。」佛即入房坐禪。諸比丘共相謂言：「佛結同戒，教我等向諸比丘尼僧說。誰能為諸比丘尼僧說？」又念：「長老跋提比丘，有福德威力名聞流布，是長老跋提比丘，能往詣王園精舍，為比丘尼僧說同戒。」諸比丘即往是比丘所言：「佛為我等結同戒，語我等言：『汝等向比丘尼僧說。』即入房坐禪。我等作是思惟：『誰能為比丘尼僧說同戒？』又作是念：『長老跋提比丘，有福德威力名聞流布，必能為說。』汝能為王園精舍比丘尼僧說同戒不？」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the Buddha didn’t lay down a shared precept in front of the bhikkhunī sangha. Having laid down a shared precept in front of the bhikkhu sangha, he told the bhikkhus: “You should explain it to the bhikkhunī sangha.” The Buddha then entered his room and sat in meditation. The bhikkhus said to each other: “The Buddha has laid down a shared precept and instructed us to explain it to the bhikkhunī sangha. Who can explain it to the bhikkhunī sangha?” They also thought: “The venerable Bhaddiya bhikkhu has merit, authority, and his good reputation is spreading around. This venerable Bhaddiya bhikkhu can go to the monastery in the king’s park and explain the shared precept to the bhikkhunī sangha.” The bhikkhus then went to this bhikkhu and told him: “The Buddha has laid down a shared precept for us and told us: ‘Explain it to the bhikkhunī sangha.’ Then he entered his room and sat in meditation. We thought: ‘Who can explain the shared precept to the bhikkhunī sangha?’ We also thought: ‘The venerable Bhaddiya bhikkhu has merit, authority, and his good reputation is spreading around. He must be able to explain it.’ Can you go to the monastery in the king’s park and explain the shared precept to the bhikkhunī sangha?” 
<lzh>長老跋提默然受之，諸比丘即頭面禮跋提足右繞而去。是夜過已，跋提比丘著衣持鉢，共後行比丘入舍衛城乞食。食後到王園比丘尼精舍，諸比丘尼遙見長老跋提比丘來，即起與敷床榻坐處，有辦水者，有辦草者。跋提到已，洗脚就座坐已，令集比丘尼僧。集已語言：「諸善女！佛結同戒，我及汝等應共受持。」是中有長老善好比丘尼，皆言：「善好。」偷蘭難陀比丘尼喑嗌不受。</lzh>
The venerable Bhaddiya accepted in silence. The bhikkhus then paid respect with their heads at Bhaddiya’s feet, circumambulated him on the right side, and left. When the night had passed, Bhaddiya bhikkhu put on his robe, took his bowl, and entered Sāvatthī with more junior bhikkhus on almsround. After the meal, he went to the bhikkhunī monastery in the king’s park. The bhikkhunīs saw from a distance that the venerable Bhaddiya bhikkhu was coming. Then they got up and set out couches and seats. Some also prepared water, and some prepared grass. When Bhaddiya had arrived, had washed his feet, and had sat down on a seat, he had the bhikkhunī sangha assembled. When they were assembled, he said: “Good women, the Buddha has laid down a shared precept. We and you should keep it together.” Among the bhikkhunīs were senior and virtuous bhikkhunīs who all said: “Very good.” But Thullanandā bhikkhunī grunted, and didn’t accept it.

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，喑嗌向比丘？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問是比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，喑嗌向比丘？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼喑嗌向比丘者，波夜提。」</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you grunt at a bhikkhu?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked that bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you grunt at a bhikkhu?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī grunts at a bhikkhu, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼喑嗌向比丘，波夜提。隨喑嗌向比丘，隨得爾所波夜提。(一百五十四事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī grunts at a bhikkhu, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she grunts at a bhikkhu, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 154.)