SarvVb_ss16


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有二比丘尼：一名達摩，二名曇彌，同心共作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱比丘尼僧，互相覆罪。</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, there were two bhikkhunīs, one called Dhammā, and the other called Tánmí. With the same intentions, they engaged in unwholesome actions together, had a bad reputation, always annoyed the bhikkhunī sangha, and covered up each other’s offenses.

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，同心共作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱比丘尼僧，互相覆罪？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問達摩曇彌比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責：「云何名比丘尼，同心共作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱比丘尼僧，互相覆罪？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you, with the same intentions, engage in unwholesome actions together, have a bad reputation, always annoy the bhikkhunī sangha, and cover up each other’s offenses?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Dhammā and Tánmí bhikkhunīs: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you, with the same intentions, engage in unwholesome actions together, have a bad reputation, always annoy the bhikkhunī sangha, and cover up each other’s offenses?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus:
<lzh>若二比丘尼，同心共作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱比丘尼僧，互相覆罪。是二比丘尼，諸比丘尼應如是諫：『汝等莫共同心，共作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱比丘尼僧，互相覆罪。汝等各遠離行，若汝等遠離行者，佛法得增長，汝等捨是隨順惡行。』諸比丘尼如是諫時，是二比丘尼堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘尼應第二、第三諫令捨是事。第二、第三諫時捨者善。若不捨者，是法乃至三諫，僧伽婆尸沙可悔過。」</lzh>


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If two bhikkhunīs, with the same intentions, engage in unwholesome actions together, have a bad reputation, always annoy the bhikkhunī sangha, and cover up each other’s offenses, the bhikkhunīs should admonish those two bhikkhunīs: “Don’t, with the same intentions, engage in unwholesome actions together, have a bad reputation, always annoy the bhikkhunī sangha, and cover up each other’s offenses. You both should practise separately. If you practise separately, you’ll attain growth in the Buddha’s dhamma. Give up following this bad conduct.” When the two bhikkhunīs are admonished by the other bhikkhunīs in this way, and they hold firmly on to this matter and don’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish them a second and a third time to make them give up this matter. If they give it up at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that act constitutes a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments, from which one can repent.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>二比丘尼作惡業者，作惡邪事身口惡業。</lzh>
“Two bhikkhunīs engaging in unwholesome actions” means they do unwholesome, wrong things, and unwholesome actions by body or speech.

<lzh>有惡名聲者，四方聞知。</lzh>
“Having a bad reputation” means heard and known in all directions.

<lzh>惱比丘尼僧者，乃至惱四比丘尼。</lzh>
“Annoying the bhikkhunī sangha” means down to annoying four bhikkhunīs.

<lzh>互相覆罪者，共作不清淨事，各相覆藏不令人知。</lzh>
“Covering up each other’s offenses” means doing impure things together, and each covering and hiding the other one’s, so as not to let people know.

<lzh>僧伽婆尸沙者，是罪屬僧，僧中有殘，因僧前悔過除滅，是名僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>
“A saṅghādisesa” means this offense is dependent upon the sangha, and in the sangha there’s a remainder. Because she confesses and clears it in front of the sangha, therefore it’s called a saṅghādisesa. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若二比丘尼同心共作不善因緣，偷蘭遮。有惡名聲，偷蘭遮。惱比丘尼僧，偷蘭遮。互相覆罪，偷蘭遮。諸比丘尼先應軟語教捨是事。若捨者，應教作四偷蘭遮悔過出罪。若軟語不捨者，應白四羯磨約勅。羯磨法者，一心和合僧，一比丘尼僧中唱言：「大德尼僧聽！是二比丘尼達摩曇彌，同心作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱眾僧，互相覆罪，已軟語約勅不捨。若僧時到僧忍聽，今僧約勅是二比丘尼：『汝等莫同心作惡業，有惡名聲，常惱比丘尼僧，互相覆罪。』是名白。」如是白四羯磨。「僧約勅竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！」如佛先說，是比丘尼，諸比丘尼應約勅，乃至三諫令捨是事者，是名為約勅，是名為教，是名約勅教。若軟語約勅不捨者，未犯。初說說未竟說竟、第二說說未竟說竟、第三說說未竟、非法別眾、非法和合眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾、如法別眾、異法異律異佛教，若約勅不捨者，未犯。若如法、如毘尼、如佛教，三約勅不捨者，是比丘尼僧伽婆尸沙。(第十六事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If two bhikkhunīs, with the same intentions, create unwholesome causes together, it’s a thullaccaya. If they’ve a bad reputation, it’s a thullaccaya. If they annoy the bhikkhunī sangha, it’s a thullaccaya. If they cover up each other’s offenses, it’s a thullaccaya. The bhikkhunīs should first admonish them with gentle speech to give up this matter. If they give it up, they should instruct them to confess four thullaccayas to clear the offenses. If they don’t give it up with gentle speech, they should admonish them in a formal act with a motion as fourth. The procedure for the formal act is as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

When the sangha is unanimous and harmonious, one bhikkhunī should announce in the sangha: “Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Those two bhikkhunīs Dhammā and Tánmí, with the same intentions, engage in unwholesome actions together, have a bad reputation, always annoy the sangha, and cover up each other’s offenses. Having been admonished with gentle speech, they didn’t give it up. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now admonishes those two bhikkhunīs: ‘Don’t, with the same intentions, engage in unwholesome actions together, have a bad reputation, always annoy the bhikkhunī sangha, and cover up each other’s offenses.’ This is called the motion.” Likewise for the formal act with a motion as fourth. “The sangha has admonished them. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” 


<h2>Explanations (continued)</h2>

As the Buddha explained earlier, those bhikkhunīs should be admonished by the bhikkhunīs up to three times to make them give up this matter. This is called the admonishment, this is called the instruction, this is called the admonishment and instruction. If they don’t give it up when being admonished with gentle speech, the offense isn’t committed yet. If when admonished, they don’t give it up when the first announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the second announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the third announcement isn’t finished yet, if it’s against the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it’s against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it’s according to dhamma in a divided assembly, or if it’s according to a different dhamma, a different vinaya, and a different Buddha’s instruction, the offense isn’t committed yet. If it’s according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction, and they don’t give it up at the third admonishment, those bhikkhunīs commit a saṅghādisesa. (End of rule 16.)
