SarvVb_pc100


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時助調達比丘尼舊住，有善好比丘尼是客。時舊比丘尼往迎，與持衣鉢共相問訊、與湯洗足、與油塗足、與好床榻，客比丘尼言：「然燈。」舊比丘尼言：「欲作何等？」客比丘尼言：「初夜當坐禪、誦經唄、呪願。」舊比丘尼言：「汝等行路疲極但當臥。」作是語已，即便自臥。客比丘尼作是念：「我等云何初夜不坐禪、不誦經唄、不呪願便臥？」即然燈坐禪、誦經唄、呪願竟欲臥。助調達比丘尼聞聲已覺問言：「善女！汝作何物？」答言：「我等坐禪誦經唄呪願竟欲臥。」舊比丘尼言：「諸善女！睡無果無報，佛讚不睡眠呵責睡眠，今我等覺不臥不睡眠。」即展一脚坐。</lzh>
The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta were old residents and virtuous bhikkhunīs were guests. Then the old bhikkhunīs went to welcome them, took their robes and bowls, and they greeted each other, they gave them hot water to wash their feet, gave them oil to rub on the feet, and gave them good beds. The guest bhikkhunīs said: “Light a lamp.” The old bhikkhunīs said: “What do you want to do?” The guest bhikkhunīs said: “In the first part of the night, we’ll sit in meditation, recite suttas, and chant mantras.” The old bhikkhunīs said: “You’ve walked on the road and are very tired, just lie down.” Having said that, they then lay down themselves. The guest bhikkhunīs thought: “How could we lie down without sitting in meditation, reciting suttas, and chanting mantras in the first part of the night?” Then they lit a lamp. When they had sat in meditation, recited suttas, and chanted mantras, they wanted to lie down. When the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta heard the sound, they woke up and asked: “Good women, what are you doing?” They answered: “Having sat in meditation, recited suttas, and chanted mantras, we want to lie down.” The old bhikkhunīs said: “Good women, sleeping is without fruit, without reward. The Buddha praised not sleeping, and criticized sleeping. Now we’re awake, not lying down, not sleeping.” Then they sat extending one foot.<note> cf. the rule about not sitting cross-legged.</note>
<lzh>善比丘尼思惟：「我等云何於燈明中臥？」舊比丘尼於中夜分坐禪誦經唄呪願，至後夜分便臥。客比丘尼作是思惟：「我等云何於後夜分臥？」客比丘尼道路疲極，竟夜不得臥故，身體不安。是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，先住者惱後住者？」種種因緣呵責已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問是比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，先住惱後住者？」佛以種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼先住惱後住者，波逸提。」</lzh>
The virtuous bhikkhunīs thought: “How could we lie down in the lamp light?” The old bhikkhunīs sat in meditation, recited suttas, and chanted mantras in the middle part of the night. When the last part of the night came, they lay down. The guest bhikkhunīs thought: “How could we lie down in the last part of the night?” The guest bhikkhunīs were very tired from the journey and because they weren’t able to lie down throughout the night, their bodies were uncomfortable. 

Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized them: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you, who’ve been staying there first, irritate the ones who’re staying there later?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked those bhikkhunīs: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you, who’ve been staying there first, irritate the ones who’re staying there later?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī has been staying somewhere first and irritates someone who is staying there later, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波逸提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼先住惱後住者，波逸提。隨惱，隨得爾所波逸提。(一百事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī has been staying somewhere first and irritates someone who is staying there later, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she irritates her, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 100.)