SarvVb_pc111

<lzh>六法壇文</lzh>
<h2>Text of the six rules ceremony.</h2>


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時舍衛城有居士婦名和羅訶，大富多財田宅種種富相成就。是居士婦，以無常因緣故，財物失盡家人分散，唯一身在。是居士婦有娠，以憂愁失親里財物夫婿故，身自枯瘦，兒胎縮小，便作是念：「我腹中兒若死、若爛。」又作是念：「諸福德樂人，無過沙門釋子，我當是中出家作比丘尼。」便往詣王園精舍作比丘尼。是人出家歡樂，肥故腹漸漸大。諸比丘尼驅出僧坊：「汝犯婬人莫住此間。」答言：「我出家以來不作婬欲，先在家時有娠。」諸比丘尼以是事向佛廣說。佛語諸比丘尼：「汝莫說是比丘尼是事，是比丘尼非破梵行，先白衣時有娠。從今聽沙彌尼二歲學六法，可知有娠無娠。</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a female householder in Sāvatthī called Heluohe, who was very rich with much wealth, fields and land, and all kinds of riches and attributes of success. Because of the impermanence of conditions, this female householder lost her wealth and her family members dispersed. She alone remained. This female householder was pregnant, and because of her sorrow of having lost her relatives, her wealth, and her husband, her body became emaciated, and the fetus in her womb shrunk. Then she thought: “The baby in my womb might have died, and be rotting there.” She also thought: “Among the meritorious, virtuous, and happy people, nobody surpasses the renunciates that are Sakyan children. I’ll go forth among them and become a bhikkhunī.” Then she went to the monastery in the king’s park and became a bhikkhunī. She enjoyed the going forth, but because she was pregnant, her belly grew bigger and bigger. The bhikkhunīs expelled her from the monastery: “You engaged in sex, don’t live here.” She answered: “I haven’t had sexual desire since I went forth. Previously, when I was at home, I became pregnant.” The bhikkhunīs explained this matter to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha told the bhikkhunīs: “Don’t say such things about this bhikkhunī. This bhikkhunī hasn’t broken celibacy. Previously, when she was a lay person, she became pregnant. From now on, I allow that a sāmaṇerī trains for two years in the six rules, so you can know whether someone is pregnant or not.


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

<lzh>受六法者，若沙彌尼初來，應教次第頭面一一禮僧足，禮已次應乞和上尼。戒師應教言：『我沙彌尼某甲，求尊為我作和上尼。尊為我作和上尼故，僧當與我二歲學戒。』第二亦應言：『我沙彌尼某甲，求尊為和尚尼。尊為我作和尚尼故，僧當與我二歲學戒。』第三亦應言：『我沙彌尼某甲，求尊為和尚尼。尊為我作和尚尼故，僧當與我二歲學戒。』一比丘尼應問和上尼：『能為某甲作和上尼不？』若言：『能。』即應將至界場內，著眼見處離聞處。爾時應問：『僧和合不？』『僧一心和合，當作僧事，是和上尼某甲，沙彌尼某甲，僧當與二歲學戒。』第二亦應言：『僧一心和合，當作僧事，是和尚尼某甲，沙彌尼某甲，僧當與二歲學戒。』</lzh>
‘Receiving the six rules’ means when a sāmaṇerī first arrives, she should be instructed to pay respect with her head at each sangha member’s feet in order. Having paid respect, she should next ask for a preceptor. The precepts master should instruct her to say: ‘I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, ask the venerable to be my preceptor. Dependent upon the venerable as my preceptor, the sangha should give me the training precepts for two years.’ A second time, she should say again: ‘I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, ask the venerable to be my preceptor. Dependent upon the venerable as my preceptor, the sangha should give me the training precepts for two years.’ A third time, she should say again: ‘I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, ask the venerable to be my preceptor. Dependent upon the venerable as my preceptor, the sangha should give me the training precepts for two years.’ One bhikkhunī should ask the preceptor: ‘Can you act as So-and-so’s preceptor?’ If she says: ‘I can’, then (the sāmaṇerī) should be taken into the territory and left in a place within sight and out of earshot. Then they should ask: ‘Is the sangha harmonious?’ ‘The sangha, unanimously and harmoniously, will carry out sangha matters, and the sangha will give the training precepts for two years to sāmaṇerī So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor.’ A second time, they should say again: ‘The sangha, unanimously and harmoniously, will carry out sangha matters, and the sangha will give the training precepts for two years to sāmaṇerī So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor.’ 
<lzh>第三亦應言：『僧一心和合，當作僧事，是和尚尼某甲，沙彌尼某甲，僧當與二歲學戒。』若僧一心和合者，應喚沙彌尼來，教一一禮比丘尼僧足。頭面禮足已，次應教令從僧乞二歲學戒，作是言：『我沙彌尼某甲，因和上尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒。因和上尼某甲，僧當與我二歲學戒，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』第二亦應言：『我沙彌尼某甲，因和上尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒。因和上尼某甲，僧當與我二歲學戒，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』第三亦應言：『我沙彌尼某甲，因和上尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒。因和上尼某甲，僧當與我二歲學戒，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』</lzh>
A third time, they should say again: ‘The sangha, unanimously and harmoniously, will carry out sangha matters, and the sangha will give the training precepts for two years to sāmaṇerī So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor.’ If the sangha is unanimous and harmonious, they should call the sāmaṇerī to come, instruct her to pay respect at each member of the bhikkhunī sangha’s feet. Having paid respect with her head at their feet, she should next be instructed to ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years by saying: ‘I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, in dependence on my preceptor So-and-so, ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years. In dependence on my preceptor So-and-so, the sangha should give me the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as my preceptor, out of compassion.’ A second time, she should say again: ‘I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, in dependence on my preceptor So-and-so, ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years. In dependence on my preceptor So-and-so, the sangha should give me the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as my preceptor, out of compassion.’ A third time, she should say again: ‘I, sāmaṇerī So-and-so, in dependence on my preceptor So-and-so, ask the sangha for the training precepts for two years. In dependence on my preceptor So-and-so, the sangha should give me the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as my preceptor, out of compassion.’
<lzh>即時戒師應僧中唱言：『大德尼僧聽！是沙彌尼某甲，因和上尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒，和上尼名某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。如是白。』『大德尼僧聽！是沙彌尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。僧今與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。誰諸尼僧忍與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲者默然；若不忍者說。是名初羯磨。』第二更說：『大德尼僧聽！是沙彌尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。僧今與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。誰諸尼僧忍與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲者默然；若不忍者說。是名第二羯磨。』</lzh>
Then the precepts master should announce in the sangha: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This sāmaṇerī So-and-so, in dependence on her preceptor So-and-so, asks the sangha for the training precepts for two years. Her preceptor is called So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha gives sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This sāmaṇerī So-and-so asks the sangha for the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha now gives sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to give sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as her preceptor, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is called the first announcement.’ A second time, she should say again: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This sāmaṇerī So-and-so asks the sangha for the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha now gives sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to give sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as her preceptor, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is called the second announcement.’
<lzh>第三更說：『大德尼僧聽！是沙彌尼某甲，從僧乞二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。僧今與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲。誰諸尼僧忍與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲者默然；若不忍者說。是名第三羯磨。』『僧已忍與沙彌尼某甲二歲學戒，和上尼某甲竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！』</lzh>
A third time, she should say again: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This sāmaṇerī So-and-so asks the sangha for the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha now gives sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years with So-and-so as her preceptor. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to give sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as her preceptor, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is called the third announcement.’ ‘The sangha has accepted to give sāmaṇerī So-and-so the training precepts for two years, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ 

<lzh>「即時為說式叉摩尼六法。『汝式叉摩尼聽！佛世尊多陀阿竭度、阿羅訶、三耶三佛陀，是知者、見者，說式叉摩尼六法。汝式叉摩尼，盡形受行。佛世尊種種因緣，呵欲、欲想、欲欲、欲覺、欲熱，佛說斷欲、除欲想、滅欲熱。若式叉摩尼，入式叉摩尼法，不捨戒、戒羸不出，相隨心想受婬欲，乃至共畜生，是非式叉摩尼、非沙彌尼、非釋女，失式叉摩尼法，是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
Then they should tell her the six sikkhamānā rules: ‘Sikkhamānā, listen. The Buddha, the World-honored One, the Tathāgata, accomplished, and rightly and fully awakened, the one who knows, the one who sees, has spoken six rules for sikkhamānās. You, sikkhamānā, should practise them for your whole life. The Buddha, the World-honored One, has with all kinds of reasons criticized desire, thoughts of desire, desire for desire, sensations of desire, and the heat of desire. The Buddha has taught to eliminate desire, to remove thoughts of desire, and to cut off the heat of desire. If a sikkhamānā undertakes the sikkhamānā rules, doesn’t give up the precepts, doesn’t disclose her weakness in the precepts, follows such thoughts, and accepts sexual intercourse, even with an animal, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a sāmaṇerī, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a sikkhamānā. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛世尊以種種因緣呵責偷奪，讚歎不偷奪，乃至一條縷、一寸納、一渧油，不與不應取。是中佛制，極少至五錢、若五錢直。若式叉摩尼隨所偷事，若王捉、若打、若縛、若擯出，若作是言：「汝賊！汝小兒！汝癡！汝墮官罪。」若式叉摩尼如是偷奪者，非式叉摩尼、非沙彌尼、非釋女，失式叉摩尼法，是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha, the World-honored One, has with all kinds of reasons criticized stealing and praised not stealing, even just one strand of thread, one inch of patchwork robes, or one drop of oil. Whatever isn’t given, you shouldn’t take. Herein, the Buddha’s rules cover even very small things down to five coins, or things worth five coins. If a sikkhamānā engages in this action of stealing, so that a king would arrest, beat, bind, or exile her, and say to her: “You criminal, you child, you fool, you’ve fallen into a judicable crime,” if a sikkhamānā steals in this way, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a sāmaṇerī, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a sikkhamānā. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛世尊種種因緣呵責殺生，讚歎離殺，乃至蟻子尚不應故奪命，何況於人！若式叉摩尼，故自手奪人命、若與刀，若教死、歎死，作是言：「咄！人用惡活為？死勝生。」隨是人意，種種因緣教死、歎死，若作憂多殺、作頭多殺、作網、作弶、作撥、若作毘陀羅殺、若作似毘陀羅殺、若斷氣殺、若墮胎殺、若按腹殺、若推著火中、推著水中、若從高推下、若遣使道中殺、若母腹中初受二根身根命根迦羅羅中生惡心方便令奪命。若以是因緣死者，是非式叉摩尼、非沙彌尼、非釋女，失式叉摩尼法，是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha, the World-honored One, has with all kinds of reasons criticized killing living beings and praised abstaining from killing. Even from ants, you shouldn’t intentionally take a life, let alone from humans. If a sikkhamānā intentionally and with her own hands takes the life of a human, or if she gives someone a knife, or if she instructs about death, praises death, and says: “Hey, you, what use is this bad life? Death is better than living,” and goes along with that person’s thoughts (about dying), if with all kinds of reasons she teaches death, praises death, if she makes a covered fire pit to kill, if she kills by trapping and then trampling someone, if she makes a net, if she makes a snare, if she kills someone with arrows, if she raises a zombie to kill, if she does something resembling raising a zombie to kill, if she cuts off someone’s breath to kill, if she causes an abortion, if she presses on the belly to kill, if she pushes someone into a fire, if she pushes someone into water, if she pushes someone down from a high place, if she sends a messenger to kill someone on the road, or if when in a mother’s womb first arise two faculties, the body faculty and the mind faculty, at the embryonic stage, an evil thought arises to plan to take that life, and someone dies for these reasons, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a sāmaṇerī, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a sikkhamānā. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛以種種因緣呵責妄語，讚歎不妄語，乃至戲笑尚不應妄語，何況故妄語！若式叉摩尼不知不見過人法，自言：「我如是知如是見，我是阿羅漢向阿羅漢、我是阿那含向阿那含、若斯陀含向斯陀含、若須陀洹向須陀洹、若得初禪、第二禪、第三禪、第四禪、若得慈悲喜捨無量心、若得無色空處定、識處定、無所有處定、非想非非想處定，若得不淨觀、阿那般那念，諸天來到我所、諸龍、夜叉、薜荔伽、毘舍闍、鳩槃茶、羅剎來到我所，彼問我我答彼，我問彼彼答我。」若式叉摩尼如是妄語者，非式叉摩尼、非沙彌尼、非釋女，失式叉摩尼法，是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized lying and praised not lying. Even as a joke you shouldn’t lie, let alone lying intentionally. If a sikkhamānā who doesn’t know and doesn’t see a superhuman state, says of herself: “I know in this way, I see in this way, I’m an arahant, on the path to arahantship, a non-returner, on the path to non-return, a once-returner, on the path to once-return, a stream-enterer, on the path to stream-entry, I attain the first, second, third, fourth jhāna, I attain the immeasurable mind of love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, I attain the formless concentration of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, and neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I attain the contemplation of impurity, mindfulness of breathing, the gods came to me, the nāgas (dragons), yakkhas (spirits), ghosts, pisācas (goblins), supaṇṇas (phoenixes), and rakkhasas (demons) came to me, and they asked me and I answered them, I asked them and they answered me”; if a sikkhamānā lies in this way, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a sāmaṇerī, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a sikkhamānā. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛以種種因緣，呵欲、欲想、欲欲、欲覺、欲熱，佛說斷欲、除欲想、滅欲熱。若式叉摩尼有漏心，聽漏心男子邊，髮際至腕、膝已上裸身，受細滑。若順身摩、若逆摩、若推、若牽、若從下抱著上、從上抱著下、若捺瘡。是非式叉摩尼、非沙彌尼、非釋女，失式叉摩尼法。若犯者可更受。是中盡形壽不應作。汝能持不？若能持當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized desire, thoughts of desire, desire for desire, sensations of desire, and the heat of desire. The Buddha has taught to eliminate desire, to remove thoughts of desire, and to cut off the heat of desire. If a sikkhamānā with a defiled mind allows a man with a defiled mind, while feeling sexual attraction, to rub her naked body up and down below the hairline and above the wrists and knees, to push her, pull her, to lift her up, set her down, or to dress a wound, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a sāmaṇerī, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a sikkhamānā. If you commit this offense, you can be ordained again. Therefore, you shouldn’t do this for your whole life. Can you keep it? If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛以種種因緣，呵欲、欲想、欲欲、欲覺、欲熱，讚歎斷欲、除欲想、滅欲熱。若式叉摩尼漏心，聽漏心男子邊，若受捉手、若捉衣、若共立、若共語、若共期、若入屏處、若待男子、若自身與，如在家女法。以此八事自身與，是非式叉摩尼、非沙彌尼、非釋女，失式叉摩尼法。若犯可更受。是中盡形壽不應作。汝能持不？若能當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized desire, thoughts of desire, desire for desire, sensations of desire, and the heat of desire. He has praised eliminating desire, removing thoughts of desire, and cutting off the heat of desire. If a sikkhamānā with a defiled mind allows a man with a defiled mind to hold her hand, hold her robes, stands together, talks together, makes an appointment, enters a secluded place, waits for him, or gives her body, like a lay woman; if she makes herself available in these eight ways, she’s not a sikkhamānā, not a sāmaṇerī, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a sikkhamānā. If you commit this offense, you can be ordained again. Therefore, you shouldn’t do this for your whole life. Can you keep it? If you can, you should say: “I can.”’

<lzh>「『汝某甲聽！僧已與汝學戒法，式叉摩尼受持六法，名式叉摩尼。汝得具滿和上尼，具滿阿闍梨尼，具滿比丘尼僧，得具滿行處，得具滿國土，得轉輪王願。汝今已滿，當恭敬三寶佛寶、法寶、僧寶、和上尼、阿闍梨尼，恭敬上中下座。當勤三學：善戒學、善定學、善慧學。當修三脫門：空、無相、無作。當勤三業：坐禪、誦經、勸化作福行。是諸法開涅槃門，得須陀洹果、斯陀含果、阿那含果、阿羅漢果，如蓮華在水中日日增長開敷，汝亦如是增長道法，後當受具足戒。</lzh>
‘So-and-so, listen. The sangha has given you the training rules. A sikkhamānā who has received and keeps the six rules is called “sikkhamānā”. You’ve obtained a preceptor, a teacher, and a bhikkhunī sangha. You’ve obtained a place to practise, you’ve obtained a (good) country, you’ve obtained what a wheel-turning king wishes for. Now that you’ve fulfilled this, you should venerate the three jewels: the Buddha jewel, the dhamma jewel, and the sangha jewel, your preceptor, your teacher, and the senior, middling, and junior nuns. You should undertake the three trainings: the training in right virtue, the training in right concentration, and the training in right wisdom. You should cultivate the three doors to liberation: the empty, the signless, and the uncreated. You should undertake the three activities: sitting in meditation, reciting suttas, and encouraging people to do meritorious acts. These states open the doors to nibbāna, to attain the fruits of stream-entry, once-returning, non-returning, and arahantship. Like a lotus flower in the water grows and opens up every day, so you’ll also grow on the path of dhamma. Later you’ll receive the full ordination.

<lzh-verse>「『釋師子法中，  
已獲難得戒；	
無難時難得，  
已得勿使空。』	
頭面禮僧足，  
右遶歡喜去。</lzh-verse>
<verse>In the dhamma of the Sakyan lion,
You’ve received the precepts hard to obtain.
A time without obstructions is hard to obtain,
You’ve obtained it, so don’t let it be in vain.
Pay respect with your head at the sangha’s feet,
Circumambulate them on the right, and leave in happiness.’</verse>


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

<lzh>「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼弟子，不二歲學六法，畜為眾者，波逸提。」</lzh>
For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī takes on a student who hasn’t trained in the six rules for two years, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波逸提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼弟子，不二歲學六法便畜為眾，波逸提。隨畜，隨得爾所波逸提(一百一十一事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī takes on a student who hasn’t trained in the six rules for two years, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she takes one on, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 111.)