SarvVb_pj7


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時有二比丘尼是姊妹：姊名彌多羅，妹名彌帝隷。彌多羅比丘尼，作不淨行犯婬欲。彌帝隷比丘尼善好，不犯婬欲。彌多羅比丘尼，後時反戒作白衣。諸比丘尼往語彌帝隷比丘尼言：「汝姊反戒作白衣為好不？」答言：「我亦先知是比丘尼犯如是如是不淨行，我但不欲自舉，不欲向僧說。或有人言：『云何名比丘尼自污姊？』」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, there were two bhikkhunīs who were sisters. The older was called Mittā, and the younger was called Mittadāsī. Mittā bhikkhunī engaged in impure conduct and sexual intercourse. Mittadāsī bhikkhunī was virtuous and didn’t engage in sexual intercourse. At a later time, Mittā bhikkhunī disrobed and became a lay person. The bhikkhunīs went and said to Mittadāsī bhikkhunī: “Is it good that your older sister has disrobed and become a lay person?” She answered: “I already knew earlier that that bhikkhunī had committed such-and-such impure conduct. But I didn’t want to bring it up myself, nor tell the sangha. Maybe people would’ve said: ‘How can you be called a bhikkhunī, when you disgrace your older sister?’”

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，有知他比丘尼有麁罪覆藏？」種種因緣呵已向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問彌帝隸比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責：「云何名比丘尼，知比丘尼犯麁罪覆藏？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you know that another bhikkhunī has a coarse offense, and conceal it?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Mittadāsī bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you know that a bhikkhunī has committed a coarse offense, and conceal it?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus:


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>若比丘尼，知比丘尼犯麁罪，覆藏乃至一夜。是比丘尼，知彼比丘尼若退、若住、若滅、若去，後作是言：『我亦先知是比丘尼犯如是如是不淨行，但不欲自舉，不欲向僧說。或有人言：「云何名比丘尼自污姊？」』是比丘尼，犯波羅夷，不應共住。」</lzh>
‘If a bhikkhunī knows that another bhikkhunī has committed a coarse offense, and conceals it even for one night, and when this bhikkhunī knows that the other bhikkhunī has either disrobed, or stayed on, or been expelled, or left, and later says: “I already knew earlier that that bhikkhunī had committed such-and-such impure conduct, but I didn’t want to bring it up myself, nor tell the sangha. Maybe people would’ve said: ‘How can you be called a bhikkhunī, when you disgrace your older sister?’,” that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>知者，若自知、若從他聞，若罪比丘尼自說。</lzh>
“Knowing” means she either knows herself, or hears it from others, or the offender bhikkhunī tells her herself.

<lzh>麁罪者，若波羅夷、若僧伽婆尸沙。復次一切罪，皆名為麁，但分別五種罪故，二種名麁。</lzh>
“A coarse offense” means either a pārājika, or a saṅghādisesa. Furthermore, all offenses are spoken of as “coarse,” but when offenses are separated into five classes, two classes are called “coarse.”

<lzh>一夜者，從日沒至地未了，是名夜。</lzh>
“One night” means from sunset to before it gets light outside (again) is called “one night”.

<lzh>彼比丘尼退者，退失比丘尼法。</lzh>
“That bhikkhunī disrobes” means she loses her status as a bhikkhunī.

<lzh>住者，住白衣法中。</lzh>
“Staying on” means she stays in the status of a lay person.

<lzh>滅者，如法、如毘尼、如佛教，與滅擯羯磨。</lzh>
“Expelled” means she’s permanently expelled in a formal act according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction.

<lzh>去者，入外道去。</lzh>
“Leaving” means she joins non-Buddhist renunciates.

<lzh>然後作是言：「我先知是比丘尼犯如是如是不淨行，我不欲自舉，不欲向僧說。或有人言：『云何妹自污姊？』」是比丘尼，犯波羅夷，不應共住。</lzh>
If she later says: “I already knew earlier that that bhikkhunī had committed such-and-such impure conduct, but I didn’t want to bring it up myself, nor tell the sangha. Maybe people would’ve said: ‘How can a younger sister disgrace her older sister?’,” that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika, and shouldn’t live in community.

<lzh>波羅夷者，是罪弊惡深重，退墮不如。若比丘尼作是罪，非沙門尼、非釋女，失比丘尼法。</lzh>
“A pārājika” means this offense is low, evil, deep, grave, and an unequalled fall. If a bhikkhunī commits this offense, she’s not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī.

<lzh>不共住者，諸比丘尼不共作法事，謂白羯磨、白二羯磨、白四羯磨、說戒、自恣、立十三比丘尼羯磨。</lzh>
“Not living in community” means that the bhikkhunīs don’t engage in matters of dhamma with her, that’s to say formal acts with a motion, formal acts with a motion as second, formal acts with a motion as fourth, the recitation of the precepts, the invitation ceremony, or performing the 13 formal acts for bhikkhunīs. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼，見餘比丘尼地了時犯波羅夷罪，是比丘尼波羅夷中生波羅夷想，竟日覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。若是比丘尼，僧與作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯、狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯。若解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，是時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika offense when it gets light outside, and that bhikkhunī perceives the pārājika as a pārājika, and conceals it for a day until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, the offense isn’t committed. If she’s released from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，見餘比丘尼，地了已、日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒時、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。是波羅夷中生波羅夷想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。若是比丘尼，僧與作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯、狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯。若解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees another bhikkhunī when it’s already light outside, at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If she perceives the pārājika as a pārājika, and conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, the offense isn’t committed. If she’s released from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，見餘比丘尼地了時，犯波羅夷。於波羅夷中，謂波羅夷、謂僧伽婆尸沙、謂波逸提、謂波羅提提舍尼、謂突吉羅，是比丘尼，於波羅夷中生僧伽婆尸沙想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見比丘尼犯波羅夷，是波羅夷中，謂僧伽婆尸沙、謂波逸提、謂波羅提提舍尼、謂突吉羅。於波羅夷中生僧伽婆尸沙想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。生波逸提想、生波羅提提舍尼想、生突吉羅想亦如是。若僧與是比丘尼作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯、狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯。若解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and thinks that the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, and that bhikkhunī perceives a pārājika as a saṅghādisesa, and conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and thinks that the pārājika is a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, and she perceives the pārājika as a saṅghādisesa, and conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. Likewise if she perceives it as a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or as a dukkaṭa. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, the offense isn’t committed. If she’s released from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，見餘比丘尼地了時犯波羅夷罪，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為非波羅夷？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波羅夷想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見比丘尼犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、非波羅夷？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波羅夷想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。若僧與作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯，若是比丘尼狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯。若僧與是比丘尼解擯，若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika or not, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pārājika, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika or not, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pārājika, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, the offense isn’t committed. If the sangha releases that bhikkhunī from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼見餘比丘尼地了時犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙；為波羅夷、為波逸提；為波羅夷、為波羅提提舍尼；為波羅夷、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波羅夷想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒時、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見比丘尼犯波羅夷罪，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙；為波羅夷、為波逸提；為波羅夷、為波羅提提舍尼；為波羅夷、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波羅夷想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯，若狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika or a saṅghādisesa; if it’s a pārājika or a pācittiya; if it’s a pārājika or a pātidesanīya; if it’s a pārājika or a dukkaṭa; but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pārājika, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika offense at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika or a saṅghādisesa; if it’s a pārājika or a pācittiya; if it’s a pārājika or a pātidesanīya; if it’s a pārājika or a dukkaṭa; but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pārājika, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, she doesn’t commit a pārājika. If the sangha releases that bhikkhunī from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals it at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，見餘比丘尼地了時，犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生僧伽婆尸沙想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見餘比丘尼，犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙；為波羅夷、為波逸提；為波羅夷、為波羅提提舍尼；為波羅夷、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生僧伽婆尸沙想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯，若狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯。若僧與是比丘尼解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a saṅghādisesa, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika or a saṅghādisesa; if it’s a pārājika or a pācittiya; if it’s a pārājika or a pātidesanīya; if it’s a pārājika or a dukkaṭa; but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a saṅghādisesa, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, the offense isn’t committed. If the sangha releases that bhikkhunī from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，見他比丘尼地了時犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波逸提想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見比丘尼，犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波逸提想，覆藏至地了時，犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯，若狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pācittiya, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pācittiya, and she conceals it until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, she doesn’t commit a pārājika. If the sangha releases that bhikkhunī from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，地了時見他比丘尼犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波羅提提舍尼想，覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見比丘尼犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生波羅提提舍尼想，覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯，若是比丘尼狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pātidesanīya, and she conceals the other’s offense until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a pātidesanīya, and she conceals the other’s offense until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, she doesn’t commit a pārājika. If the sangha releases that bhikkhunī from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika.

<lzh>若比丘尼，地了時見他比丘尼犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生突吉羅想，覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。又比丘尼，日出時、日出已；中前、日中、日昳；晡時、日沒、日沒已；初夜初分、初夜中分、初夜後分；中夜初分、中夜中分、中夜後分；後夜初分、後夜中分、後夜後分，見比丘尼犯波羅夷，於波羅夷中生疑，為波羅夷、為僧伽婆尸沙、為波逸提、為波羅提提舍尼、為突吉羅？後時斷疑，於波羅夷中生突吉羅想，覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼作不見擯、不作擯、惡邪不除擯，若是比丘尼狂心、亂心、病壞心，爾時覆藏不犯波羅夷。若僧與是比丘尼解擯、若苦痛止還得本心，爾時覆藏他罪至地了時，犯波羅夷。(七事竟)</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika when it gets light outside, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a dukkaṭa, and she conceals the other’s offense until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If a bhikkhunī sees that another bhikkhunī commits a pārājika at sunrise, after sunrise, before midday, at midday, after midday, in the late afternoon, at sunset, after sunset, in the first part of the first watch of the night, in the middle part of the first watch of the night, in the last part of the first watch of the night, in the first part of the second watch of the night, in the middle part of the second watch of the night, in the last part of the second watch of the night, in the first part of the last watch of the night, in the middle part of the last watch of the night, in the last part of the last watch of the night, and doubt arises if the pārājika is a pārājika, a saṅghādisesa, a pācittiya, a pātidesanīya, or a dukkaṭa, but at a later time, the doubt is allayed and she perceives the pārājika as a dukkaṭa, and she conceals the other’s offense until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. If the sangha expels that bhikkhunī for not seeing (an offense), or for not making (amends), or for not giving up an unwholesome, wrong view, or if she’s insane, confused, or if an illness disturbs her mind, and at such a time she conceals it, she doesn’t commit a pārājika. If the sangha releases that bhikkhunī from the expulsion, or if the pain stops and she regains mental sanity, and she conceals the other’s offense at that time until it gets light outside (again), she commits a pārājika. (End of rule 7.)