SarvVb_pc78


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，擲大小便牆外。是僧坊近大巷，時波斯匿王大臣名摩尼，著淨衣服從是巷過，屎墮頭上。是大臣爾時為王所責，有知相婆羅門，隨大臣後行。婆羅門言：「汝疾洗頭還到王所，此是吉相，必得大利。」大臣即洗頭詣王所，王歡喜還復本職。諸比丘尼，聞偷蘭難陀比丘尼以屎尿擲牆外，墮波斯匿王大臣頭上，污大臣頭故，王與本職。「是摩尼大臣兇惡無慈，知當與我等作何苦惱事？」以是思惟，怖畏故，除老病比丘尼，餘皆走去。爾時摩尼大臣作是念：「我得本職者，皆由比丘尼僧房因緣故，我當往安慰諸比丘尼。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikhunī threw excrement and urine over a wall. This monastery was close to a major road, and just then king Pasenadi’s high official Maṇi, who was wearing clean clothes, passed by on this road, and the excrement fell on his head. This high official had been scolded by the king just then. A brahmin knowledgeable in signs was walking behind the high official and said: “Quickly wash your head and return to the king. This is an auspicious sign, you must receive a large benefit.” When the high official then had washed his head and gone to the king, the king happily reinstated him to his original position. The bhikkhunīs heard that Thullanandā bhikkhunī had thrown excrement and urine over a wall, that it had fallen on the head of king Pasenadi’s high official, and that because it had soiled the high official’s head, the king had given him back his original position. (They thought:) “This high official Maṇi is fierce and has no compassion. Who knows what kind of trouble he’ll create for us?” With this thought, out of fear, all bhikkhunīs except for the old and sick ones went away. Then the high official Maṇi thought: “I’ve obtained my original position, all thanks to the incident at the bhikkhunī monastery. I’ll go and make the bhikkhunīs comfortable.”
<lzh>是摩尼大臣，即往比丘尼僧房，見諸比丘尼少，問諸老病比丘尼言：「是中比丘尼僧何以故少？」比丘尼言：「汝不知耶？」答言：「不知。」比丘尼言：「偷蘭難陀比丘尼，以屎尿擲牆外。波斯匿王大臣摩尼，從此巷過，墮其頭上。王與本職，是人兇惡無慈，諸比丘尼作是思惟：『知當與我等作何等苦惱事？』如是思惟，怖畏故，諸比丘尼皆悉走去。我等老病無力，故不能去。」是大臣言：「波斯匿王大臣摩尼者，即我身是。汝等莫怖畏，我與汝等飲食、薪草、燈燭、衣服及無畏施。」</lzh>
The high official Maṇi then went to the bhikkhunī monastery. When he saw that there were few bhikkhunīs, he asked the old and sick ones: “Why are there so few of the bhikkhunī sangha here?” The bhikkhunīs answered: “Don’t you know that?” He answered: “I don’t know.” The bhikkhunīs said: “Thullanandā bhikkhunī threw excrement and urine over a wall, and king Pasenadi’s high official Maṇi was passing by on that road and it fell on his head. The king has given him back his old position, and this person is fierce and has no compassion. The bhikkhunīs thought: ‘Who knows what kind of trouble he’ll create for us?’ Thinking thus, out of fear, the bhikkhunīs all went away. We’re old, sick, and without strength, therefore we can’t go.” The high official said: “King Pasenadi’s high official Maṇi, that’s me. Don’t be afraid, I’ll offer you food and drinks, firewood, grass, lamps, candles, robes, and freedom from fear.”
<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，以屎尿擲牆外？」種種因緣呵已向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問偷蘭難陀比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，以屎尿擲牆外？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼以屎尿擲牆外，波夜提。」</lzh>

Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you throw excrement and urine over a wall?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you throw excrement and urine over a wall?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī throws excrement and urine over a wall, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼以屎尿擲牆外，波夜提。隨擲，隨得爾所波夜提。若二比丘尼，共大小便一器中，一人舉授、一人擲牆外。舉者，突吉羅；擲者，波夜提。若比丘尼，若以手擲，波夜提。若以草土裹擲牆外者，突吉羅。(七十八事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī throws excrement and urine over a wall, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she throws it, she incurs a pācittiya. If two bhikkhunīs defecate and urinate into one receptacle, and one person lifts it up and hands it to the other, who throws it over the wall, for the one who lifts it, it’s a dukkaṭa, and for the one who throws it, it’s a pācittiya. If a bhikkhunī throws with the hand, it’s a pācittiya. If she wraps it in grass or earth and throws it over a wall, it’s a dukkaṭa. (End of rule 78.)