SarvVb_pc101


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸善比丘尼是舊，助調達比丘尼是客。時舊比丘尼見客比丘尼來，出迎問訊代擔衣鉢、與湯洗脚、以油塗足、與床臥具。舊比丘尼言：「善女！然燈。」客比丘尼言：「莫然燈，我道路疲極，不得坐禪、誦經唄、呪願，我等欲臥。」舊比丘尼思惟：「我等云何初夜不坐禪、不誦經唄、不呪願便臥？」即起然燈坐禪、誦經唄、呪願已欲臥。客比丘尼聞是聲覺，作是言：「善女欲作何等？」答言：「我等坐禪竟欲臥。」客比丘尼言：「睡眠無果無報，佛讚歎不睡眠法、呵責睡眠，我等覺，今不睡。」即然燈坐禪。</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the virtuous bhikkhunīs were old residents and the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta were guests. When the old bhikkhunīs saw the guest bhikkhunīs coming, they went to welcome them, greeted them, carried the robes and bowls for them, gave them hot water to wash their feet, rubbed oil on their feet, and gave them beds and bedding. The old bhikkhunīs said: “Good women, we’ll light a lamp.” The guest bhikkhunīs said: “Don’t light a lamp. We’re very tired from the journey, we’re not able to sit in meditation, recite suttas, and chant mantras. We want to lie down.” The old bhikkhunīs thought: “How could we lie down without sitting in meditation, reciting suttas, and chanting mantras in the first part of the night?” Then when they had got up, lit a lamp, sat in meditation, recited suttas, and chanted mantras, they wanted to lie down. When the guest bhikkhunīs heard the sound, they woke up and said: “Good women, what do you want to do?” They answered: “Having sat in meditation, we want to lie down.” The guest bhikkhunīs said: “Sleeping is without fruit, without reward. The Buddha praised the state of not sleeping, and criticized sleeping. We’re awake, now we’re not sleeping.” Then they lit a lamp and sat in meditation.
<lzh>舊比丘尼思惟：「我等云何燈明中臥？」客比丘尼中夜分坐禪竟，至後夜分便臥。舊比丘尼思惟：「我等云何後夜分臥？」以是故竟夜不臥，身不安隱。是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，後住惱前住者？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問客比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，後住惱先住比丘尼？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼後住惱前住者，波逸提。」</lzh>
The old bhikkhunīs thought: “How could we lie down in the lamp light?” The guest bhikkhunīs sat in meditation in the middle part of the night. When the last part of the night came, they lay down. The old bhikkhunīs thought: “How could we lie down in the last part of the night?” For this reason, they didn’t lie down throughout the night, and their bodies were uncomfortable. 

Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you, who’re staying there later, irritate the ones who’ve been staying there first?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked the guest bhikkhunīs: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you,  who’re staying there later, irritate the ones who’ve been staying there first?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī is staying somewhere later and irritates someone who has been staying there first, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波逸提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼後住惱前住者，波逸提。隨惱，隨得爾所波逸提。(一百一事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī is staying somewhere later and irritates someone who has been staying there first, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she irritates her, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 101.)