SarvVb_ss17


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時助調達諸比丘尼，往語達摩、曇彌二比丘尼，作是言：「汝等莫別離行，當同心行。若汝等別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，僧以瞋故，教汝別離行。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta went to Dhammā and Tánmí bhikkhunīs and said: “Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately.”
<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，往語達摩曇彌比丘尼言：『汝等莫別離行，當同心行。若別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，僧以瞋故，教汝別離行。』」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問助調達比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，往語達摩曇彌比丘尼言：『汝等莫別離行，當同心行。若別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，僧以瞋故，教汝別離行。』」種種因緣呵責已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>

Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you go and say to Dhammā and Tánmí bhikkhunīs: ‘Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately’?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you go and say to Dhammā and Tánmí bhikkhunīs: ‘Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately’?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus:

<lzh>若比丘尼教二比丘尼言：『汝等莫別離行，當同心行。別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，僧以瞋故，教汝別離行。』諸比丘尼，應如是諫是比丘尼：『汝莫教是二比丘尼作是言：「汝等莫別離行，當同心行。別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，僧以瞋故，教汝別離行。」汝當捨是勸邪行事。』諸比丘尼如是諫時，是比丘尼堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘尼應第二、第三諫令捨是事。第二、第三諫時捨者善。若不捨者，是法乃至三諫，僧伽婆尸沙。可悔過。」</lzh>

<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī instructs two other bhikkhunīs: “Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Don’t instruct these two other bhikkhunīs: ‘Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately.’ You should give up exhorting them about this wrong conduct.” When that bhikkhunī is admonished by the other bhikkhunīs in this way, and she holds firmly on to this matter and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her a second and a third time to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that act constitutes a saṅghādisesa after three admonishments, from which one can repent.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>僧伽婆尸沙者，是罪屬僧，僧中有殘，因僧前悔過除滅，是名僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>
“A saṅghādisesa” means this offense is dependent upon the sangha, and in the sangha there’s a remainder. Because she confesses and clears it in front of the sangha, therefore it’s called a saṅghādisesa. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼勸二比丘尼言：「汝等莫別離行。」偷蘭遮。「當同心行」，偷蘭遮。若言：「別離行者不得增長」，偷蘭遮。「同心行者便得增長」，偷蘭遮。若言：「比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，僧瞋故教汝別離行。」呵責比丘尼僧故，波逸提。諸比丘尼先應軟語教捨者，應教作四偷蘭遮、一波逸提悔過出罪。若軟語不捨者，應白四羯磨約勅。羯磨法者，一心和合僧，一比丘尼僧中唱言：「大德尼僧聽！是某甲比丘尼，教某甲二比丘尼，作是言：『汝等莫別離行，當同心行。別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。比丘尼僧中亦有如汝等者，但僧瞋故，教汝別離行。』已軟語約勅不捨。若僧時到僧忍聽，今僧約勅某甲比丘尼：『汝莫教某甲二比丘尼作是言：「汝莫別離行，當同心行。別離行者不得增長，同心行者便得增長。僧中亦有如汝等者，僧以瞋故，教汝別離行。」汝當捨是勸邪行事。』是名白。」如是白四羯磨。「僧與某甲比丘尼約勅竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！」如佛先說，是比丘尼，諸比丘尼乃至三諫令捨是事者，是名為約勅，是名為教，是名約勅教。若軟語約勅不捨者，未犯。初說說未竟說竟、第二說說未竟說竟、第三說說未竟、非法別眾、非法和合眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾、如法別眾、異法異律異佛教，若約勅不捨者，未犯。若如法、如律、如佛教，三約勅不捨者，是比丘尼犯僧伽婆尸沙。(第十七事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī exhorts two other bhikkhunīs: “Don’t practise separately,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “You should practise with the same intentions,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth,” it’s a thullaccaya. If she says: “There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately,” because of the criticism of the bhikkhunī sangha, it’s a pācittiya. The bhikkhunīs should first admonish her with gentle speech. If she gives it up, they should instruct her to confess four thullaccayas and one pācittiya to clear the offenses. If she doesn’t give it up with gentle speech, they should admonish her in a formal act with a motion as fourth. The procedure for the formal act is as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

When the sangha is unanimous and harmonious, one bhikkhunī should announce in the sangha: “Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This bhikkhunī So-and-so instructs the two bhikkhunīs So-and-so and So-and-so: ‘Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately.’ Having been admonished with gentle speech, she didn’t give it up. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now admonishes bhikkhunī So-and-so: ‘Don’t instruct these two bhikkhunīs So-and-so and So-and-so: “Don’t practise separately, you should practise with the same intentions. If you practise separately, you’ll not attain growth. If you practise with the same intentions, then you’ll attain growth. There are also others like you in the bhikkhunī sangha, but out of anger, the sangha instructs you to practise separately.” You should give up exhorting them about this wrong conduct.’ This is called the motion.” Likewise for the formal act with a motion as fourth. “The sangha has admonished bhikkhunī So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” 


<h2>Explanations (continued)</h2>

As the Buddha explained earlier, that bhikkhunī should be admonished by the bhikkhunīs up to three times to make her give up this matter. This is called the admonishment, this is called the instruction, this is called the admonishment and instruction. If she doesn’t give it up when being admonished with gentle speech, the offense isn’t committed yet. If when admonished, she doesn’t give it up when the first announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the second announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the third announcement isn’t finished yet, if it’s against the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it’s against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it’s according to dhamma in a divided assembly, or if it’s according to a different dhamma, a different vinaya, and a different Buddha’s instruction, the offense isn’t committed yet. If it’s according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction, and she doesn’t give it up at the third admonishment, that bhikkhunī commits a saṅghādisesa. (End of rule 17.)
