SarvVb_pc127

<lzh>比丘尼壇文</lzh>
<h2>Text of the bhikkhunī ordination ceremony.</h2>


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有迦毘羅女作比丘尼名跋陀，有式叉摩尼可受大戒。爾時阿難常為比丘尼差十比丘眾，與受大戒。時阿難中前著衣持鉢入舍衛城乞食，跋陀比丘尼遙見阿難舍衛城乞食，往到其所，頭面禮足一面住，白言：「大德阿難！我有式叉摩尼可受大戒，願差十比丘眾。」阿難問言：「比丘尼僧作乞屬和上尼羯磨未？」答言：「已作。」「何時作耶？」答言：「昨日作。」阿難即默然受。跋陀比丘尼知阿難受已，頭面禮足而去。阿難乞食食已到祇洹，持戶鉤遊行，從一房至一房。佛遙見阿難持戶鉤從房至房遊行，佛知故問阿難：「汝何故持戶鉤遊行從房至房？」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a Kapilan woman called Bhaddā, who became a bhikkhunī. She had a sikkhamānā eligible for the full ordination. At that time, Ānanda often chose a group of 10 bhikkhus for the bhikkhunīs, to give the full ordination. Then Ānanda before midday put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Sāvatthī on almsround. Bhaddā bhikkhunī saw him on almsround in Sāvatthī from a distance, went to him, paid respect with her head at his feet, stood at one side, and said: “Venerable Ānanda, I have a sikkhamānā eligible for the full ordination. Please choose a group of 10 bhikkhus.” Ānanda asked: “Has the bhikkhunī sangha carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor?” She answered: “We’ve done it.” “When have you done it?” She answered: “We’ve done it yesterday.” Then Ānanda agreed silently. When Bhaddā bhikkhunī knew that Ānanda had agreed, she paid respect with her head at his feet and left. When Ānanda had finished his almsround and eaten, he went to Jetavana, took a door hook, and wandered from dwelling to dwelling. The Buddha saw from a distance that Ānanda had taken a door hook and was wandering from dwelling to dwelling. The Buddha knew, and intentionally asked Ānanda: “Why have you taken a door hook and wander from dwelling to dwelling?”
<lzh>阿難白言：「世尊！跋陀比丘尼有式叉摩尼可受大戒，語我差十比丘眾。我今欲差，是故持戶鉤遊行諸房。」佛問阿難：「諸比丘尼作乞屬和上尼羯磨未？」答言：「已作。」「何時作耶？」答言：「昨日作。」佛知故問阿難：「諸比丘尼用宿作乞屬和上尼羯磨，欲畜眾耶？」答言：「用宿作。世尊！」佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問跋陀比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責：「云何名比丘尼，用宿作乞屬和上尼羯磨畜眾？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼宿作乞屬和上尼羯磨畜眾者，波夜提。」
Ā</lzh>nanda told him: “World-honored One, Bhaddā bhikkhunī has a sikkhamānā eligible for the full ordination. She told me to choose a group of 10 bhikkhus. I now want to choose them, and for this reason I’ve taken a door hook and wander among the dwellings.” The Buddha asked Ānanda: “Have the bhikkhunīs carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor?” He answered: “They’ve done it.” “When have they done it?” He answered: “They’ve done it yesterday.” The Buddha knew, and intentionally asked Ānandā: “So the bhikkhunīs use a formal act of dependence on a preceptor that was carried out the previous day when they want to take on a student?” He answered: “They use one from the previous day, World-honored One.” 

The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Bhaddā bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you use a formal act of dependence on a preceptor that was carried out the previous day to take on a student?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī takes on a student with a formal act of dependence on a preceptor carried out the previous day, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼用宿作乞屬和上尼羯磨畜眾者，波夜提。隨畜，隨得波夜提。</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī uses a formal act of dependence on a preceptor that was carried out the previous day to take on a student, it’s a pācittiya. Whenever she takes one on, she incurs a pācittiya.

<lzh>佛雖如是聽受大戒法，諸比丘尼不知云何受？佛言：「受具足法者，比丘尼初來，將式叉摩尼入尼僧中，教人人頭面禮僧足竟。尼羯磨師應教受衣鉢，問：『此衣是汝有不？』答言：『是。』應教効我語：『我某甲，是衣僧伽梨若干條受，割截衣持。』第二：『是衣僧伽梨若干條受，割截衣持。』第三：『是衣僧伽梨若干條受，割截衣持。』次問：『此衣是汝有不？』答言：『是。』『我某甲，是衣欝多羅僧七條受，兩長一短，割截衣持。』第二：『是衣欝多羅僧七條受，兩長一短，割截衣持。』第三：『是衣欝多羅僧七條受，兩長一短，割截衣持。』</lzh>
Even though the Buddha had allowed to give the full ordination, the bhikkhunīs didn’t know how to give it. The Buddha said: “The procedure for giving the full ordination is: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

The bhikkhunīs arrive first. Someone lets the sikkhamānā enter among the bhikkhunī sangha, and instructs her to pay respect with her head at each sangha member’s feet. The bhikkhunī master of ceremony should instruct her to determine her robes and bowl, and ask: ‘Is this your robe?’ She answers: ‘Yes.’ (The master of ceremony) should instruct her to repeat after her: ‘I, So-and-so, determine this robe as my saṅghāṭī with several strips, and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ For a second time: ‘I determine this robe as my saṅghāṭī with several strips, and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ For a third time: ‘I determine this robe as my saṅghāṭī with several strips, and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ Then she asks: ‘Is this your robe?’ She answers: ‘Yes.’ ‘I, So-and-so, determine this robe as my upper robe, with seven strips, (each consisting of) two long and one short (part), and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ For a second time: ‘I determine this robe as my upper robe, with seven strips, (each consisting of) two long and one short (part), and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ For a third time: ‘I determine this robe as my upper robe, with seven strips, (each consisting of) two long and one short (part), and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ 

<lzh>次問：『此衣是汝有不？』答言：『是。』『我某甲，是衣安陀會五條受，一長一短，割截衣持。』第二：『是衣安陀會五條受，一長一短，割截衣持。』第三：『是衣安陀會五條受，一長一短，割截衣持。』若僧伽梨縵，是僧伽梨縵衣受持。若欝多羅僧縵，是欝多羅僧縵衣受持。安陀會縵，是衣縵安陀會受持。次教言：『此衣覆肩衣受是，是汝有不？』答言：『是。』應教言：『此衣覆肩衣受，長四肘廣二肘半，是覆肩衣持。』第二：『此衣覆肩衣受，長四肘廣二肘半，是覆肩衣持。』第三：『此衣覆肩衣受，長四肘廣二肘半，是衣覆肩衣持。』</lzh>
Next (the master of ceremony) asks: ‘Is this your robe?’ She answers: ‘Yes.’ ‘I, So-and-so, determine this robe as my lower robe, with five strips, (each consisting of) one long and one short (part), and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ For a second time: ‘I determine this robe as my lower robe, with five strips, (each consisting of) one long and one short (part), and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ For a third time: ‘I determine this robe as my lower robe, with five strips, (each consisting of) one long and one short (part), and confirm it as a patchwork robe.’ If the saṅghāṭī is unpatterned, she determines and confirms this saṅghāṭī as an unpatterned robe. If the upper robe is unpatterned, she determines and confirms this upper robe as an unpatterned robe. If the lower robe is unpatterned, she determines and confirms this lower robe as an unpatterned robe. Next (the master of ceremony) instructs her: ‘Is this robe, a shoulder-covering robe, to be determined, yours?’ She answers: ‘Yes.’ (The master of ceremony) should instruct her to say: ‘I determine this robe as my shoulder-covering robe, four forearm’s lengths long and two and a half wide, and confirm it as my shoulder-covering robe.’ For a second time: ‘I determine this robe as my shoulder-covering robe, four forearm’s lengths long and two and a half wide, and confirm it as my shoulder-covering robe.’ For a third time: ‘I determine this robe as my shoulder-covering robe, four forearm’s lengths long and two and a half wide, and confirm it as my shoulder-covering robe.’ 

<lzh>次教：『此衣厥修羅受，長四肘廣二肘半，此衣厥修羅衣持。』第二：『此衣厥修羅受，長四肘廣二肘半，此衣厥修羅衣持。』第三：『此衣厥修羅受，長四肘廣二肘半，此衣厥修羅衣持。』次問言：『此鉢多羅是汝有不？』答言：『是。』應教言：『我某甲，此鉢多羅應量受，長用故。』第二：『此鉢多羅應量受，長用故。』第三：『此鉢多羅應量受，長用故。』受衣鉢已。</lzh>
Next (the master of ceremony) instructs her: ‘I determine this robe as my kusūla<note> A kind of skirt.</note>, four forearm’s lengths long and two and a half wide, and confirm it as my kusūla.’ For a second time: ‘I determine this robe as my kusūla, four forearm’s lengths long and two and a half wide, and confirm it as my kusūla.’ For a third time: ‘I determine this robe as my kusūla, four forearm’s lengths long and two and a half wide, and confirm it as my kusūla.’ Next (the master of ceremony) asks: ‘Is this your bowl?’ She answers: ‘Yes.’ (The master of ceremony) should instruct her to say: ‘I, So-and-so, determine this bowl of the appropriate size, to be used for a long time.’ For a second time: ‘I determine this bowl of the appropriate size, to be used for a long time.’ For a third time: ‘I determine this bowl of the appropriate size, to be used for a long time.’ The robes and bowl have been determined.

<lzh>次教令乞屬和上尼：『我某甲式叉摩尼，求尊為和上尼，願尊為我作和上尼。我某甲，因尊和上尼故，僧當與我作乞屬和上尼羯磨，憐愍故！』第二：『我某甲，求尊為和上尼，願尊為我作和上尼。我某甲，因尊和上尼故，僧當與我作乞屬和上尼羯磨，憐愍故！』第三：『我某甲。求尊為和上尼，願尊為我作和上尼。我某甲，因尊和上尼故，僧當與我作乞屬和上尼羯磨，憐愍故！』應問和上尼：『能不？』若言：『能。』應教著見處離聞處。</lzh>
Next (the master of ceremony) instructs her to request dependence from her preceptor: ‘I, sikkhamānā So-and-so, ask the venerable to be my preceptor. May the venerable act as my preceptor. Because the venerable is my, So-and-So’s, preceptor, the sangha will carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for me, out of compassion.’ For a second time: ‘I, So-and-so, ask the venerable to be my preceptor. May the venerable act as my preceptor. Because the venerable is my, So-and-So’s, preceptor, the sangha will carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for me, out of compassion.’ For a third time: ‘I, So-and-so, ask the venerable to be my preceptor. May the venerable act as my preceptor. Because the venerable is my, So-and-So’s, preceptor, the sangha will carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for me, out of compassion.’ (The master of ceremony) should ask the preceptor: ‘Can you do it?’ If she answers: ‘I can’, (the master of ceremony) should instruct (the candidate) to stay in a place within sight, but out of earshot.

<lzh>即時尼羯磨師應僧中如是唱：『誰能為某甲作教師？』若有一比丘尼言：『我能。』」佛言：「是比丘尼有五法，不應令作教師。何等五？隨愛教、隨瞋教、隨怖教、隨癡教、不知教不教。若成就五法，應作教師。何等五法？不隨愛教、不隨瞋教、不隨怖教、不隨癡教、知教不教。即時應唱言：『大德尼僧聽！是式叉摩尼某甲，從和上尼某甲欲受具足戒。比丘尼某甲，能為作教師，教某甲故。若僧時到僧忍聽，比丘尼某甲為教師，教某甲故。如是白。』『大德尼僧聽！是某甲式叉摩尼，從和上尼某甲欲受具足戒，某甲能作教師教某甲。誰諸尼僧忍立某甲為教師教某甲者默然，誰不忍便說。』『僧已立某甲為教師教某甲竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！』</lzh>
Then the bhikkhunī master of ceremony should announce in the sangha: ‘Who can act as So-and-so’s teacher?’ If there’s a bhikkhunī who says: ‘I can’, —The Buddha said: “If that bhikkhunī has five qualities, you shouldn’t let her act as a teacher. Which five? She teaches based on desire, anger, fear, and delusion, and she doesn’t know whether she has instructed or not. If she’s accomplished in five qualities, she should act as a teacher. Which five qualities? She doesn’t teach based on desire, anger, fear, and delusion, and she knows whether she has instructed or not.”— then (the master of ceremony) should announce: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This sikkhamānā So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. Bhikkhunī So-and-so can act as her teacher, to instruct So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve bhikkhunī So-and-so as the teacher, to instruct So-and-so. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This sikkhamānā So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. So-and-so can act as her teacher, to instruct So-and-so. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to establish So-and-so as the teacher to instruct So-and-so should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak.’ ‘The sangha has established So-and-so as the teacher to instruct So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ 

<lzh>(已被羯磨者，應往教正衣服、右膝著地、合掌而問言：)「『汝某甲聽！今是至誠時、實語時，後尼僧中亦如是。我今問汝，若實者當言實，若不實當言不實。我今問汝：汝是女不？是人不？非是非人不？非畜生不？非是不能女不？女根上有毛不？不枯壞不？無㿃下病不？非偏不？不二道合不？女根不小不？非是不能產不？非是無乳不？非是一乳不？非是恒有月水不？非無月忌不？非婢不？非客作不？非買得不？非破得不？非兵婦不？非吏婦不？非犯官罪不？不負他物不？女人有如是等病：癩病、癰疽病、痟盡病、癲狂病、長熱病，無如是等病不？父母夫主在不？父母夫主聽出家不？五衣鉢具不？汝字何等？和上尼字誰？』答言：『我字某甲，和上尼名某甲。』(尼教師問竟，應白僧：『是式叉摩尼某甲，我已問竟。』尼羯磨師應言：『若清淨者將來。』更一一禮尼僧足已。)</lzh>
(When the formal act is done, (the teacher) should go and instruct (the candidate) to straighten her robes, place her right knee on the ground, join her palms, and then ask her:) ‘So-and-so, listen. Now, as well as later in the midst of the bhikkhunī sangha, a time of sincerity, a time of speaking the truth has come. I’ll now ask you and if something is true, you should say that it’s true. If not, you should say that it isn’t true. I now ask you: Are you a woman? Are you a human being? Are you not a non-human being? Are you not an animal? Are you not an infertile woman? Is there hair on your genitals? Are they not decayed and decomposed? Do you not have a disease in the area below the belt? Are your genitals not malformed? Are your anus and vagina not joined? Is your vagina not small? Are you not unable to give birth? Are you not without breasts? Do you not have just one breast? Do you not menstruate constantly? Do you not never menstruate? Are you not a slave? Are you not a worker? Have you not been bought? Have you not been captured? Are you not a female soldier? Are you not a government official? Have you not committed a judicable crime? Have you not borrowed someone else’s things? Women have diseases such as: leprosy, abscesses, tuberculosis, epilepsy, and long fevers. Do you not have such diseases? Are your parents and husband around? Have your parents and husband allowed you to go forth? Are your five robes and bowl complete? What’s your name? What’s your preceptor’s name?’ She answers: ‘My name is So-and-so, and my preceptor’s name is So-and-so.’ (When the bhikkhunī teacher has finished asking, she should inform the sangha: ‘I finished asking this sikkhamānā So-and-so.’ The bhikkhunī master of ceremony should say: ‘If she’s pure, bring her here.’ Then (the candidate) again pays respect at each sangha member’s feet.)

<lzh>「次教乞屬和上尼羯磨。羯磨法者，『我某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。我今從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲。僧當與我屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』第二：『我某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。我今從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲。僧當與我作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』第三：『我某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。我今從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲。僧當與我某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』</lzh>
Next she instructs her to ask for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor. The procedure of the formal act is: ‘I, So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I now ask the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with So-and-so as my preceptor. The sangha should give me the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with So-and-so as my preceptor, out of compassion.’ For a second time: ‘I, So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I now ask the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with So-and-so as my preceptor. The sangha should carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for me, with So-and-so as my preceptor, out of compassion.’ For a third time: ‘I, So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I now ask the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with So-and-so as my preceptor. The sangha should carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for me, So-and-so, with So-and-so as my preceptor, out of compassion.’

<lzh>「尼羯磨師，應僧中作如是唱：『大德尼僧聽！是某甲，從某甲和上尼，欲受具足戒。是某甲，從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，我今僧中問某甲遮道法。如是白。』應作是言：『汝某甲聽！今是至誠時、實語時，我今僧中問汝，若實言實，若不實當言不實。汝是女不？是人不？非是非人不？非畜生不？非是不能女不？女根上有毛不？不枯壞不？無㿃下病不？非偏不？不二道合不？女根不小不？非是不能產不？非是無乳不？非是一乳不？非恒有月水不？非無月忌不？非婢不？非客作不？非買得不？非破得不？非兵婦不。非吏婦不？非犯官事不？不負他物不？</lzh>
The bhikkhunī master of ceremony should announce in the sangha: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so asks the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with So-and-so as her preceptor. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that I now ask So-and-so in the sangha about the states that obstruct the path. This is the motion.’ She should say: ‘So-and-so, listen. Now a time of sincerity, a time of speaking the truth has come. I’ll now ask you in the sangha, and if something is true, you should say that it’s true. If not, you should say that it isn’t true. Are you a woman? Are you a human being? Are you not a non-human being? Are you not an animal? Are you not an infertile woman? Is there hair on your genitals? Are they not decayed and decomposed? Do you not have a disease in the area below the belt? Are your genitals not malformed? Are your anus and vagina not joined? Is your vagina not small? Are you not unable to give birth? Are you not without breasts? Do you not have just one breast? Do you not menstruate constantly? Do you not never menstruate? Are you not a slave? Are you not a worker? Have you not been bought? Have you not been captured? Are you not a female soldier? Are you not a government official? Have you not committed a judicable crime? Have you not borrowed someone else’s things? 

<lzh>女人有如是等病：癩病、癰疽病、痟盡病、癲狂病、長熱病，無有如是等病不？父母夫主在不？父母夫主聽出家不？五衣鉢具不？汝名何等？和上尼字誰？』應答言：『我名某甲，和上尼名某甲。』『頗有未問者不？若未問者我當更問，若已問者應默然。』即語言：『汝某甲默然。』是中尼羯磨師僧中唱：『大德尼僧聽！某甲式叉摩尼，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。是某甲，從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲。某甲自說清淨無遮道法，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與某甲為作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。如是白。』</lzh>
Women have diseases such as: leprosy, abscesses, tuberculosis, epilepsy, and long fevers. Do you not have such diseases? Are your parents and husband around? Have your parents and husband allowed you to go forth? Are your five robes and bowl complete? What’s your name? What’s your preceptor’s name?’ She should answer: ‘My name is So-and-so, and my preceptor’s name is So-and-so.’ ‘Might there be something that I haven’t asked for? If I haven’t asked it yet, I’m asking now. If I’ve asked (for everything), you should remain silent.’ Then she should say: ‘You, So-and-so, are silent.’ Then the bhikkhunī master of ceremony should announce in the sangha: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Sikkhamānā So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so asks the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with So-and-so as her preceptor. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure and without the states that obstruct the path, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha carries out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with her preceptor called So-and-so. This is the motion.’ 

<lzh>『大德尼僧聽！某甲式叉摩尼，欲從和上尼某甲受具足戒。是某甲從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨無遮道法，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。僧當與某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。誰諸比丘尼僧忍某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲者默然；不忍者說。是初羯磨竟。』第二：『大德尼僧聽！某甲式叉摩尼，欲從和上尼某甲受具足戒。是某甲從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨無遮道法，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。僧當與某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。是中誰諸比丘尼僧忍某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼某甲者默然；不忍者說。是第二羯磨竟。』</lzh>
‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Sikkhamānā So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so asks the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure and without the states that obstruct the path, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. The sangha will carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with her preceptor called So-and-so. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ For a second time: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Sikkhamānā So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so asks the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure and without the states that obstruct the path, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. The sangha will carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with her preceptor called So-and-so. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with So-and-so as her preceptor, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the second announcement.’

<lzh>第三：『大德尼僧聽！某甲式叉摩尼，欲從和上尼某甲受具足戒。是某甲從僧乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨無遮道法，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。僧當與某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲。誰諸比丘尼僧忍某甲作乞屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲者默然；不忍者說。是第三羯磨竟。』『僧已為某甲作屬和上尼羯磨，和上尼名某甲，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！』(比丘尼眾應在比丘尼寺中作如是羯磨，作竟即將至大僧寺中二部僧和合與受具戒。)</lzh>
For a third time: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Sikkhamānā So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. This So-and-so asks the sangha for the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure and without the states that obstruct the path, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. The sangha will carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with her preceptor called So-and-so. Those of the bhikkhunī sangha who accept to carry out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with her preceptor called So-and-so, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the third announcement.’ ‘The sangha has carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor for So-and-so, with her preceptor called So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ (The bhikkhunī sangha should carry out this formal act in the bhikkhunī monastery. When they’ve carried it out, they should take (the candidate) to the bhikkhu monastery, and give the full ordination in both sanghas in harmony.)

<lzh>「將至大僧中一一禮僧足，應教從僧乞受具足戒：『我某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。今從僧乞受具足戒法，和上尼名某甲。僧當濟度我，與我受具足戒，憐愍故！』第二：『我某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。我今從僧中乞受具足戒法，和上尼名某甲。僧當濟度我，與我受具足戒，憐愍故！』第三：『我某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。我今從僧乞受具足戒法，和上尼名某甲。僧當濟度我，與我受具足戒，憐愍故！』一比丘應僧中唱言：『大德僧聽！是某甲，從和上尼某甲，欲受具足戒。今從眾僧中乞受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，我當僧中問某甲六法。如是白。』</lzh>
Having taken (the candidate) to the bhikkhu sangha, and paid respect at each sangha member’s feet, they should instruct her to ask for the full ordination from the sangha: ‘I, So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I now ask the sangha for the procedure of full ordination, with my preceptor called So-and-so. The sangha should let me cross over and give me the full ordination, out of compassion.’ For a second time: ‘I, So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I now ask the sangha for the procedure of full ordination, with my preceptor called So-and-so. The sangha should let me cross over and give me the full ordination, out of compassion.’ For a third time: ‘I, So-and-so, want to receive the full ordination from my preceptor So-and-so. I now ask the sangha for the procedure of full ordination, with my preceptor called So-and-so. The sangha should let me cross over and give me the full ordination, out of compassion.’ A bhikkhu should announce in the sangha: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. She now asks the sangha for the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that I now ask So-and-so in the sangha about the six rules. This is the motion.’

<lzh>應語彼言：『汝某甲聽！今是至誠時、實語時。我今僧中問汝，實者當言實，不實者當言不實。汝某甲清淨不？汝從出家來順行出家法不？二歲學六法不？比丘尼僧作本事不？比丘尼僧和合已，作乞屬和上尼羯磨未？五衣鉢具不？汝字誰？和上尼字誰？』答言：『我名某甲，和上尼名某甲。』『頗有未問者不？若未問者我當更問，已問者汝默然。』『大德僧聽！某甲從和上尼某甲欲受具足戒，某甲今從僧乞受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨，順行出家法，已二歲學六法，比丘尼僧已作本事竟，比丘尼僧和合已作屬和上尼羯磨，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。若僧時到僧忍聽，與某甲受具足戒。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。如是白。』</lzh>
He should ask her: ‘So-and-so listen. Now a time of sincerity, a time of speaking the truth has come. I’ll now ask you in the sangha, and if something is true, you should say that it’s true. If not, you should say that it isn’t true. Are you, So-and-so, pure? Have you followed the rules of renunciates since your going forth? Have you trained for two years in the six rules? Has the bhikkhunī sangha carried out the preliminary acts? Has the bhikkhunī sangha in harmony carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor? Are your five robes and bowl complete? What’s your name? What’s your preceptor’s name?’ She answers: ‘My name is So-and-so, and my preceptor’s name is So-and-so.’ ‘Might there be something that I haven’t asked for? If I haven’t asked it yet, I’m asking now. If I’ve asked (for everything), you should remain silent.’ ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. So-and-so now asks the sangha for the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure, follows the rules of renunciates, has trained for two years in the six rules, that the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out the preliminary acts, that the bhikkhunī sangha in harmony has carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to give So-and-so the full ordination. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. This is the motion.’

<lzh>『大德僧聽！某甲從和上尼某甲欲受具足戒，今從眾僧中乞受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨，順行出家法，已二歲學六法，比丘尼僧已作本事竟，比丘尼僧和合已作屬和上尼羯磨，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。僧當與某甲受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。誰諸長老忍某甲受具足戒，和上尼名某甲者默然；誰不忍者說。是初羯磨說竟。』第二：『大德僧聽！某甲從和上尼某甲欲受具足戒，今從眾僧中乞受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨，順行出家法，已二歲學六法，比丘尼僧已作本事竟，比丘尼僧和合已作屬和上尼羯磨，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。僧當與某甲受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。誰諸長老忍某甲受具足戒，和上尼名某甲默然；誰不忍者說。是第二羯磨說竟。』</lzh>
‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. She now asks the sangha for the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure, follows the rules of renunciates, has trained for two years in the six rules, that the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out the preliminary acts, that the bhikkhunī sangha in harmony has carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. The sangha will give So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. Those of the venerables who accept to give So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ For a second time: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. She now asks the sangha for the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure, follows the rules of renunciates, has trained for two years in the six rules, that the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out the preliminary acts, that the bhikkhunī sangha in harmony has carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. The sangha will give So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. Those of the venerables who accept to give So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the second announcement.’

<lzh>第三：『大德僧聽！某甲從和上尼某甲欲受具足戒，今從眾僧中乞受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。某甲自說清淨，順行出家法，已二歲學六法，比丘尼僧已作本事竟，比丘尼僧和合已作屬和上尼羯磨，五衣鉢具。某甲名某甲，和上尼名某甲。僧當與某甲受具足戒，和上尼名某甲。誰諸長老忍某甲受具足戒，和上尼名某甲者默然；誰不忍者便說。是第三羯磨說竟。』『僧已與某甲受具足戒竟，和上尼名某甲，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！』應教言：『若人問：「汝幾歲？」應答言：「無歲。」「何時節？」隨時應答：「若春、若夏、若冬、若閏、無閏。」皆應隨實答是事，汝盡形應憶念。』</lzh>
For a third time: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. So-and-so wants to receive the full ordination from her preceptor So-and-so. She now asks the sangha for the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. So-and-so said herself that she’s pure, follows the rules of renunciates, has trained for two years in the six rules, that the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out the preliminary acts, that the bhikkhunī sangha in harmony has carried out the formal act of dependence on a preceptor, and that her five robes and bowl are complete. So-and-so is called So-and-so, and her preceptor is called So-and-so. The sangha will give So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. Those of the venerables who accept to give So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so, should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the third announcement.’ ‘The sangha has given So-and-so the full ordination, with her preceptor called So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ They should instruct her: ‘If someone asks: “How many vassa do you have?”, you should say: “I have no vassa.” “In which season (were you ordained)?”, you should answer accordingly whether it was spring, summer, or winter, with an intercalary month or without an intercalary month. You should answer truthfully about these matters, and you should remember it for your whole life.’

<lzh>即應為說三依止法：『汝某甲聽！佛世尊多陀阿竭、阿羅呵、三耶三佛是知者、見者，說受大戒比丘尼三依止法。比丘尼依是法，得出家受戒行比丘尼法。何等三？一者依糞掃衣。比丘尼依是，得出家受戒行比丘尼法。若更得盈長衣，所謂赤麻衣、白麻衣、芻麻衣、翅夷羅衣、繒衣、欽婆羅衣、劫貝衣，如是清淨衣，皆是盈長衣得。是中汝盡形依糞掃衣，能持不？若能當言：「能。」</lzh>
Then they should explain the three supports: ‘Listen, So-and-so. The Buddha, the World-honored One, the Tathāgata, accomplished, and rightly and fully awakened, the one who knows, the one who sees, explained three supports for a fully ordained bhikkhunī. Relying on these things, a bhikkhunī is able to go forth, receive the full ordination, and practise the rules of bhikkhunīs. Which three? The first is relying on rag robes. Relying on this, a bhikkhunī is able to go forth, receive the full ordination, and practise the rules of bhikkhunīs. If she additionally obtains an abundance of robes, such as a red hemp robe, a white hemp robe, a linen robe, owls’ wings’ robe, a silk robe, a woolen robe, or a cotton robe, and other such pure robes, all these abundant robes are allowed. Therefore, you should rely on rag robes for your whole life. Can you keep it? If you can, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>二者依乞食。比丘尼出家受戒行比丘尼法，若更得盈長施食，若相食、故作食、齋日食、月一日食、十六日食、眾僧食、別房食、請食、若僧、若別請，如是等清淨諸食，皆名盈長得。是中盡形依乞食，能持不？若能當言：「能。」</lzh>
The second is: Relying on almsround a bhikkhunī goes forth, receives the full ordination, and practises the rules of bhikkhunīs. If she additionally obtains abundant offerings of food, such as food shared among sangha members, intentionally prepared food, food on the ritual days, meals on the first and sixteenth day of the month, sangha meals, meals in individual buildings, invitational meals both for the sangha or for individuals, and other such pure meals, all these are called abundant and allowed. Therefore, you should rely on almsround for your whole life. Can you keep it? If you can, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>三者依腐棄藥。比丘尼出家受戒，行比丘尼法。若更得盈長施，酥、油、蜜、石蜜；四種淨脂：熊脂、驢脂、猪脂、鱣脂；五種根藥：舍梨、薑、赤附子、波提、鞞沙、菖蒲根；五種果藥：訶梨勒、阿摩勒、鞞醯勒、胡椒、蓽茇羅；五種鹽：紫鹽、赤鹽、白鹽、黑鹽、鹵樓鹽；五種湯：華湯、葉湯、根湯、莖湯、果湯；五種樹膠：興渠膠、薩闍賴膠、底夜膠、底夜和提膠、底夜和那膠。如是等諸餘清淨藥，是盈長得故。當依腐棄藥，汝盡形能持不？若能當言：「能。」』</lzh>
The third is: Relying on rotten and discarded medicine, a bhikkhunī goes forth, receives the full ordination, and practises the rules of bhikkhunīs. If she additionally obtains abundant offerings of ghee, oil, honey, sugar, the four kinds of pure fats: from bears, donkeys, pigs, and sturgeons, the five kinds of root medicines: the roots of sarsaparilla <note>Pāli: sāribā/sārivā</note>, ginger, red monkshood, atis <note>Pāli: ativisā</note>, and sweet flag; the five kinds of fruit medicines: chebulic myrobalan, emblic myrobalan, belleric myrobalan, black pepper, and long pepper <note>Pāli: pippali</note>, the five kinds of salts: purple, red, white, black, and soil salt, the five kinds of infusions: from flowers, leaves, roots, stalks, and fruits, or the five kinds of tree gum: asafoetida <note>Pāli: hiṅgu</note>, resin <note>Pāli: sajjulasa</note>, taka gum, taka-leaf gum <note>Pāli: takapatti</note>, and gum from heated taka foliage <note>Pāli: takapaṇṇi</note>, and other such pure medicines, all these are abundant and allowed. You should rely on rotten and discarded medicines. Can you keep it for your whole life? If you can, you should say: “I can.”’

<lzh>「次應說八墮法：『汝某甲聽！佛世尊多薩阿竭、阿羅呵、三耶三佛，是知者、見者，說是受具足戒比丘尼，得三依止八墮法。若比丘尼於八墮法中，隨所犯一一法，非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法，如截多羅樹頭畢竟不生，不復增長。比丘尼亦如是，八墮法中隨所犯者，非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。佛世尊種種因緣，呵責欲、欲想、欲欲、欲覺、欲熱。佛讚歎斷欲、除欲想、滅欲熱。若比丘尼，同入比丘尼戒法，不捨戒、戒羸不出想，隨心受婬欲乃至共畜生，是非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
Next they should explain the eight pārājika rules: ‘Listen, So-and-so. The Buddha, the World-honored One, the Tathāgata, accomplished, and rightly and fully awakened, the one who knows, the one who sees, explained that a fully ordained bhikkhunī has obtained three supports and eight offenses of defeat (pārājikas). If a bhikkhunī commits any of the eight pārājikas, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. Just as when you cut off the crown of a tāla palm tree, it never comes back to life again, never grows again, so too a bhikkhunī who has committed any of the eight pārājikas is not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. The Buddha, the World-honored One, has with all kinds of reasons criticized desire, thoughts of desire, desire for desire, sensations of desire, and the heat of desire. The Buddha has praised eliminating desire, removing the thoughts of desire, and cutting off the heat of desire. If a bhikkhunī undertakes the bhikkhunī precepts and rules, doesn’t give up the precepts, doesn’t disclose her weakness in the precepts, follows such thoughts and accepts sexual intercourse, even with an animal, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛種種因緣呵責偷奪法，讚歎不偷奪法，乃至一條縷、一寸納、一渧油，尚不應偷奪。是中佛制，極少乃至五錢、若五錢直。若比丘尼隨所偷事，若王捉、若打、若縛、若擯出，作是言：「汝賊、汝小兒、汝癡、汝墮官罪。」若比丘尼如是偷奪者，非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized the act of stealing, and praised the act of not stealing. Even just one strand of thread, one inch of patchwork robes, or one drop of oil, you still shouldn’t steal. Herein, the Buddha’s rules cover even very small things down to five coins, or things worth five coins. If a bhikkhunī engages in this action of stealing, so that a king would arrest, beat, bind, or exile her, and say to her: “You criminal, you child, you fool, you’ve fallen into a judicable crime,” if a bhikkhunī steals in this way, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛種種因緣呵責殺生，讚歎不殺生。乃至蟻子尚不應故奪命，何況於人！若比丘尼，自手故奪人命、若與刀、若教死、歎死，作是言：「咄！人用惡活為？死勝生，隨彼心樂死！」種種因緣教死、歎死，若作憂多殺、若作頭多殺、作弶、作網、作撥、若作毘陀羅、若作似毘陀羅、若斷氣殺、若墮胎殺、若按腹殺、若推著火中水中、若從高推下、若使道中死、若母腹中初受二根身根命根加羅羅中生惡心方便令奪命。若以是因緣死者，是非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized killing living beings and praised abstaining from killing. Even from ants, you shouldn’t intentionally take a life, let alone from humans. If a bhikkhunī with her own hands intentionally takes the life of a human, or if she gives someone a knife, or if she teaches death, praises death, and says: “Hey, you, what use is this bad life? Death is better than living,” and goes along with that person’s thoughts to delight in death, if with all kinds of reasons she teaches death, praises death, if she makes a covered fire pit to kill, if she kills by trapping and then trampling someone, if she makes a net, if she makes a snare, if she kills someone with arrows, if she raises a zombie to kill, if she does something resembling raising a zombie to kill, if she cuts off someone’s breath to kill, if she causes an abortion, if she presses on the belly to kill, if she pushes someone into a fire or into water, if she pushes someone down from a high place, if she sends someone to kill someone else on the road, or if when in a mother’s womb first arise two faculties, the body faculty and the mind faculty, at the embryonic stage, an evil thought arises to plan to take that life, and someone dies for these reasons, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛種種因緣呵責妄語，種種因緣讚歎不妄語，是中乃至戲笑尚不應妄語，何況故妄語！若比丘尼不知不見過人法，自言：「我如是知、如是見，我是阿羅漢向阿羅漢，若阿那含向阿那含，若斯陀含向斯陀含，若須陀洹向須陀洹，若得初禪、第二禪、第三禪、第四禪，若得慈、悲、喜、捨無量心，若得無色虛空定、識處定、無所有處定、非想非非想處定，若得不淨觀、阿那般那念，諸天來至我所，諸龍、夜叉、薜荔伽、毘舍闍、鳩槃茶、羅剎來到我所，彼問我我答彼，我問彼彼答我。」若比丘尼如是妄語者，非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized lying, and with all kinds of reasons praised not lying. Therefore, even as a joke you shouldn’t lie, let alone lying intentionally. If a bhikkhunī who doesn’t know and doesn’t see a superhuman state, says of herself: “I know in this way, I see in this way, I’m an arahant, on the path to arahantship, a non-returner, on the path to non-return, a once-returner, on the path to once-return, a stream-enterer, on the path to stream-entry, I attain the first, second, third, fourth jhāna, I attain the immeasurable mind of love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, I attain the formless concentration of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, and neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I attain the contemplation of impurity, mindfulness of breathing, the gods came to me, the nāgas (dragons), yakkhas (spirits), ghosts, pisācas (goblins), supaṇṇas (phoenixes), and rakkhasas (demons) came to me, and they asked me and I answered them, I asked them and they answered me”; if a bhikkhunī lies in this way, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛以種種因緣呵欲、欲想、欲欲、欲覺、欲熱，佛說斷欲、除欲想、滅欲熱。若比丘尼有漏心，聽漏心男子，髮際至腕膝已上却衣，順摩逆摩抱捉牽推，舉上舉下捺瘡者，非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized desire, thoughts of desire, desire for desire, sensations of desire, and the heat of desire. The Buddha has taught to eliminate desire, to remove thoughts of desire, and to cut off the heat of desire. If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind allows a man with a defiled mind, having removed her robes, to rub her up and down below the hairline and above the knees and the wrists, to embrace, hold, pull, or push her, to lift her up and set her down, or to dress a wound, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛種種因緣呵欲、欲想、欲欲、欲覺、欲熱，佛說斷欲、除欲想、滅欲熱。若比丘尼有漏心，聽漏心男子，捉手、捉衣、共立、共語、共期、入屏覆處、待男子來、自身往就，如白衣女。以此八事示貪著相，是非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized desire, thoughts of desire, desire for desire, sensations of desire, and the heat of desire. He has taught to eliminate desire, to remove thoughts of desire, and to cut off the heat of desire. If a bhikkhunī with a defiled mind allows a man with a defiled mind to hold her hand, hold her robes, stands together, talks together, makes an appointment, enters a secluded place, waits for the man to come, and moves her body, like a lay woman, if by these eight things, she shows the signs of craving and attachment, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛種種因緣呵責惡知識、惡伴黨，讚歎善知識、善伴黨。若比丘尼，知他比丘尼犯重罪，覆藏乃至一夜，是比丘尼，知彼比丘尼若退、若住、若失、若遠去，後作是言：「我先知是比丘尼有如是如是事，不欲自向人說，不欲向僧說，不欲令人知。」作是言：「云何妹自污姊？」是非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized bad friends and bad companions, and praised good friends and good companions. If a bhikkhunī knows that another bhikkhunī has committed a grave offense, and conceals it even for one night, and when this bhikkhunī knows that the other bhikkhunī has either disrobed, or stayed on, or disappeared, or left, and later says: “I already knew earlier that that bhikkhunī had such-and-such an offense, but I didn’t want to tell others myself, nor tell the sangha, nor let people know. They might have said: ‘How can a younger sister disgrace her older sister?’,” she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”

<lzh>佛種種因緣呵責惡知識、惡伴黨，讚歎善伴黨、善知識。若比丘尼，知比丘一心和合僧作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶，不休不息，隨順相助。諸比丘尼應語是比丘尼言：「僧一心和合作不見擯，是比丘獨一無二、無伴無侶，不休不息，汝莫隨順。」若是比丘尼，諸比丘尼如是諫時，堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘尼應第二、第三諫，令捨是事故。第二、第三諫時捨者善。不捨者，是非比丘尼、非沙門尼、非釋女，失滅比丘尼法。是事盡形不應作。若能持者當言：「能。」』</lzh>
The Buddha has with all kinds of reasons criticized bad friends and bad companions, and praised good friends and good companions. If a bhikkhunī knows that a bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), that he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist, and she follows and helps him, the bhikkhunīs should say to that bhikkhunī: “The unanimous, harmonious sangha has expelled this bhikkhu for not seeing (an offense), and he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist. Don’t follow him.” When that bhikkhunī is admonished by the other bhikkhunīs in this way, and she holds firmly on to this matter and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her a second and a third time to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, she’s not a bhikkhunī, not a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and she has lost her status as a bhikkhunī. You shouldn’t do this for your whole life. If you can keep it, you should say: “I can.”’

<lzh>應語言：『汝從今應善軟心易教化隨順師教。汝某甲已受大戒竟，好和上尼、好阿闍梨尼、好眾僧、好僧坊、好檀越、好行道處、好國土，轉輪聖王所願尚不能得滿，汝今得滿。汝應恭敬三寶：佛寶、法寶、僧寶。應學三學：善戒學、善心學、善慧學。修三脫門：空、無相、無願。勤行三業：坐禪、誦經，佐助眾事。汝勤行是法者，得開須陀洹果門、斯陀含果門、阿那含果門、阿羅漢果門，如青赤白蓮華在水中日日增長，汝等諸善根亦日日增長。餘殘戒法，和上阿闍梨漸漸為汝廣說。』即說偈言：</lzh>
They should say: ‘From now on, you should, with a good and soft mind, gently guide others to follow the Teacher’s teaching. You, So-and-so, have received the full ordination, with a good preceptor, a good teacher, in a good sangha, in a good monastery, with good supporters, in a good place to practise the path, in a good country. What wheel-turning noble kings wish for, but can’t attain, you’ve now attained. You should venerate the three jewels: the Buddha jewel, the dhamma jewel, and the sangha jewel. You should train in the three trainings: the training in right virtue, the training in right concentration, and the training in right wisdom. You should cultivate the three doors to liberation: the empty, the signless, and the desireless. You should strive in the three activities: sitting in meditation, reciting suttas, and assisting in matters of the community. If you strive in this dhamma, you’ll be able to open the doors to the fruits of stream-entry, once-returning, non-returning, and arahantship. Like blue, red, and white lotus flowers in the water grow every day, your wholesome roots will also grow every day. Your preceptor and your teacher will gradually explain the remaining precepts and rules to you in detail.’ Then they should recite the verses:

<lzh-verse>「『汝得受具戒，  
深知於佛法；	
普善真微妙，  
廣大珍寶聚。	
天王釋所願、  
轉輪王所願、	
閻羅王所願，  
汝今已得滿。	</lzh-verse>
<verse>‘You received the full ordination,
and profoundly know the Buddha’s dhamma;
universal, wholesome, true, and subtle,
a wide and great heap of jewels.
What the god-king Sakka wishes for,
what a wheel-turning king wishes for,
what king Yama wishes for,
you have now attained.</verse>

<lzh-verse>常當勤精進，  
修習諸善法：	
勤修行三業，  
當開甘露門。	
於一切法中，  
得無障礙慧；	
如華日增長，  
汝善根亦爾。</lzh-verse>
<verse>Always strive dilligently,
practise the wholesome states;
energetically striving in the three activities,
you’ll open the door to ambrosia.
In regard to all states,
attain unobstructed wisdom;
As a flower daily grows,
so should your wholesome roots.</verse>

<lzh-verse>餘殘諸戒法，  
佛世尊所說；	
和上阿闍梨，  
當為汝廣說。』	
頭面禮僧足，  
右遶歡喜去。」	</lzh-verse>
<verse>The remaining precepts and rules,
spoken by the Buddha, the World-honored One,
will be explained to you in detail
by your preceptor and your teacher.
Pay respect with you head at the sangha’s feet,
Circumambulate them on the right, and leave in happiness.’”</verse>

<lzh>(一百二十七事竟)</lzh>
(End of rule 127.)