SarvVb_pc93


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時迦羅比丘尼，本是外道，共諸比丘尼鬪諍時，自作法呪、泥犁呪：「若汝謗我是事者，令汝不得四念處、四正勤、四如意足、五根、五力、七覺、八道，令汝世世墮地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若我有是事者，令我不得四念處、四正勤、四如意足、五根、五力、七覺、八道，當世世墮地獄、畜生、餓鬼。」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Kālī bhikkhunī, who was formerly a non-Buddhist renunciate, while quarreling with the bhikkhunīs, made a curse with regard to the dhamma, and made a curse with regard to hell: “If you slander me about this issue, may you not attain the four places for mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four supernormal powers, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of awakening, and the eightfold path, and may you life after life fall into hell, the animal realm, or the realm of hungry ghosts. If I have this issue, may I not attain the four places for mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four supernormal powers, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of awakening, and the eightfold path, and may I life after life fall into hell, the animal realm, or the realm of hungry ghosts.”
<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，共比丘尼鬪諍時，作法呪、泥犁呪？」種種因緣呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問迦羅比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，共比丘尼鬪諍時，作法呪、泥犁呪？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼，共比丘尼鬪諍時，作法呪、泥犁呪，波夜提。」</lzh>

Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you, while quarreling with the bhikkhunīs, make a curse with regard to dhamma and with regard to hell?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Kālī bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you, while quarreling with the bhikkhunīs, make a curse with regard to dhamma and with regard to hell?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī, while quarreling with the bhikkhunīs, makes a curse with regard to dhamma and with regard to hell, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>波夜提者，燒煮覆障，若不悔過，能障礙道。</lzh>
“Pācittiya” means burn, cook, cover, obstruct. If she doesn’t confess the offense, it can obstruct the path. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼，共比丘尼鬪諍時，作法呪、泥犁呪，作是言：「若汝以是事謗我者，令汝不得四念處。」波夜提。「不得四正勤、四如意足、五根、五力、七覺、八道」，皆波夜提。若言：「汝當世世墮地獄。」波夜提。「墮畜生、餓鬼」，皆波夜提。若言：「我有是事者，令我不得四念處、四正勤、四如意足、五根、五力、七覺、八道。」皆波夜提。若言：「我世世墮地獄、畜生、餓鬼。」皆波夜提。隨作是語，隨得爾所波夜提。(九十三事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī, while quarreling with the bhikkhunīs, makes a curse with regard to dhamma and with regard to hell and says: “If you slander me about this issue, may you not attain the four places for mindfulness,” it’s a pācittiya. “May you not attain the four right efforts, the four supernormal powers, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of awakening, and the eightfold path,” all are pācittiyas. If she says: “May you life after life fall into hell,” it’s a pācittiya. “Fall into the animal realm, or the realm of hungry ghosts,” all are pācittiyas. If she says: “If I have this issue, may I not attain the four places for mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four supernormal powers, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of awakening, and the eightfold path,” all are pācittiyas. If she says: “May I life after life fall into hell, the animal realm, or the realm of hungry ghosts,” all are pācittiyas. Whenever she says it, she incurs a pācittiya. (End of rule 93.)