SarvVb_ss8


<lzh-fascicle-start>十誦律卷第四十三(第七誦之二)
後秦北印度三藏弗若多羅共羅什譯
尼律第二(十七僧殘中不共戒有十之餘)</lzh-fascicle-start>
<en-fascicle-start>Sarvāstivāda Vinaya, fascicle 43 (Part two of the seventh recitation chapter.)
Translated by the northern Indian Tipiṭaka master Puṇyatāra together with Kumārajīva during the later Qin dynasty.
Part two of the Bhikkhunī Vinaya — (The remainder of the 10 unshared precepts among the 17 saṅghādisesas.)</en-fascicle-start>


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時波斯匿王有千鬪將，半剎利種、半婆羅門種，一部名伊舍羅、一部名達多摩那。波斯匿王有小國反叛，約勅千鬪將令往伐之。即往伐，破還，白王言：「我等得勝，願王常勝。」王聞心歡喜悅：「汝欲何願？我當與汝。」鬪將白言：「我婦有罪，不隨我意，聽六日與死飲，至七日以牛舌刀破裂其身。」王言：「與汝此願。」爾時一剎利將婦不隨夫意，欲六日與死飲，至七日以牛舌刀裂破其身。是婦多有親里力勢來遮，不聽與死飲。諸鬪將法，一人有事餘者盡助，剎利眾集已，強與死飲。待至七日以牛舌刀，裂破其身作兩分。時有比丘尼名斯那，是摩那居士女，常是家出入。</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, king Pasenadi had 1.000 generals, half of whom were of khattiya clans, and half of brahmin clans. One part was called Īsāna(?) and the other Dattamāna(?). A small country rebeled against king Pasenadi, and he instructed the 1.000 generals to go and attack them. Then they went, attacked, and defeated them. They returned and told the king: “We’ve obtained a victory. May the king always be victorious.” When the king heard it, his mind was overjoyed: “What do you wish for? I’ll grant it to you.” A general said: “My wife is doing wrong. She doesn’t submit to my will. Allow me to give her deadly drinks for six days, and to split her body with an ox-tongue-knife on the seventh day.” The king said: “I grant you this wish.” At that time, the wife of a khattiya general didn’t submit to her husband’s will, and he wanted to give her deadly drinks for six days, and to split her body with an ox-tongue-knife on the seventh day. This wife had many powerful relatives who came and restrained him, and didn’t allow to give her deadly drinks. According to the generals’ rules, if one person had a problem, the others all helped out. A group of khattiyas gathered and they gave her the deadly drinks by force. They waited for the seventh day to split her body into two parts with an ox-tongue-knife. Then there was a bhikkhunī called Senā(?), who was the daughter of the householder Māna(?), and always went in and out of this house.
<lzh>早起著衣入是家，見諸剎利婦澡浴莊嚴、身著好衣服瓔珞，是剎利婦獨著垢衣、不莊嚴身、愁憂而坐。比丘尼問言：「餘婦皆著莊嚴好衣，汝何故獨著垢衣，又不莊嚴愁憂而坐？」答言：「汝不聞耶？」問言：「何等？」答言：「我不隨夫意，今受六日死飲，至七日當以牛舌刀裂破我身作兩分。汝能將我去不？我去誰當覺者？」答言：「能。」比丘尼即袈裟覆此婦，將走詣尼僧坊中與出家。後日諸剎利眾集，以牛舌刀欲殺，眾人言：「喚此婦來！」即入舍覓不見，求覓不得。剎利眾言：「誰常出入是家？」答言：「有斯那比丘尼，常出入我家，或能將去。」剎利眾即往圍遶王園比丘尼僧坊。剎利婦出家未久，諸比丘尼欲遮剎利眾。</lzh>
She got up early, put on her robes, and entered that house. She saw khattiya women bathed and adorned, wearing beautiful clothes and ornaments, but this woman alone wore dirty clothes, hadn’t adorned her body, and sat there distressed. The bhikkhunī asked her: “The other women are all adorned and wear beautiful clothes. Why do you alone wear dirty clothes, with no adornments, and sit here distressed?” She answered: “Haven’t you heard?” She asked: “What?” She answered: “I don’t submit to my husband’s will. Now I receive deadly drinks for six days, and on the seventh day, he’ll split my body into two parts with an ox-tongue-knife. Can you take me away? If I go, who’d notice?” She answered: “I can.” The bhikkhunī then hid this woman under her robes, took her to the bhikkhunī monastery, and gave her the going forth. On a later day, the group of khattiyas gathered and wanted to kill her with an ox-tongue-knive. The group said: “Summon this woman!” Then they entered the house and searched, but didn’t see her. Having searched but not found her, the group of khattiyas said: “Who always went in and out of this house?” (The husband) answered: “There’s Senā bhikkhunī, who often went in and out of my house. Maybe she was able to take her away.” The group of khattiyas then went and surrounded the bhikkhunī monastery in the king’s park. The khattiya woman hadn’t long gone forth, and the bhikkhunīs wanted to restrain the group of khattiyas.
<lzh>是眾中有年少剎利，不知罪福，作是言：「一切比丘尼，皆應以牛舌刀破裂作兩分。」中有長老剎利言：「比丘尼是王所守護，我等不宜橫作惡事，或能不可。汝等小待，我先白王，王有所勅當隨王教。」諸比丘尼即詣末利夫人廣說上事，夫人即向王說。王先知故於殿上坐，諸剎利往詣王所拜言：「大王常勝。」王言：「我先與汝願，汝今當與我願。」剎利眾言：「隨大王所願當與。」王言：「是剎利婦今已出家，便是更生，非剎利婦。」剎利眾言：「今隨王意，當放去。」王即遣使語比丘尼：「諸善女！是事不是，汝等知是賊女應死，知王不聽、剎利不聽，如是女人不應與出家，諸剎利若破汝等作兩分者，我當云何？佛聞是事必當與汝等結戒，若比丘尼知是賊女決斷墮死，眾人皆知，王及剎利不聽，不得度作弟子。」</lzh>
Among the group were young khattiyas who didn’t understand merit and demerit, and said: “All the bhikkhunīs should be split into two parts with an ox-tongue-knive.” Among them were also senior khattiyas who said: “Bhikkhunīs are protected by the king. It’s not appropriate and not reasonable for us to do an unwholesome thing that might be forbidden. Wait a little while, we’ll first inform the king. Whatever the king instructs us to do, we’ll do.” The bhikkhunīs then went to queen Mallikā and explained this matter in detail, and the queen spoke with the king. The king sat in the palace, already knowing the circumstances, and the khattiyas went to him, paid respect, and said: “May the great king always be victorious.” The king said: “I’ve previously granted you your wish. Now you should grant me my wish.” The group of khattiyas said: “We’ll grant it according to the great king’s wish.” The king said: “This khattiya woman has now already gone forth, it’s as if she was reborn. She’s not a khattiya woman anymore.” The group of khattiyas said: “We now follow the king’s wish and will let her go.” The king then sent a messenger to tell the bhikkhunīs: “Good women, this matter was inacceptable. You knew that this was a criminal woman who should die. You knew that the king didn’t allow it, that the khattiyas didn’t allow it, and that such a woman shouldn’t be given the going forth. If the khattiyas split you into two parts, what can I do? When the Buddha hears about this matter, he must lay down a precept for you: If a bhikkhunī knows that a criminal woman has been sentenced to death, that the general population knows, and that the king and the khattiyas haven’t allowed it, she may not ordain her and take her as a student.”

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問斯那比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，知賊女決斷墮死，度作弟子？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼知賊女決斷墮死，眾人皆知，王及剎利眾不聽，度作弟子，是法初犯僧伽婆尸沙可悔過。」</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Senā bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you know that a criminal woman has been sentenced to death, and ordain her and take her as your student?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī knows that a criminal woman has been sentenced to death, that the general population knows, and that the king and the khattiyas haven’t allowed it, and she ordains her and takes her as a student, that act is an immediate saṅghādisesa, from which one can repent.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>知者，若自知、若從他聞、若賊女自說。</lzh>
“Knowing” means she either knows herself, or hears it from others, or the criminal woman tells her herself.

<lzh>賊者，有二種：一者偷奪財物，二者偷身。</lzh>
“A criminal” means there are two kinds: 1) someone who steals material possessions, 2) someone who abducts people.

<lzh>墮死者，作罪應死。</lzh>
“Death” means having committed a crime for which one should die.

<lzh>眾人知者，多人所知見聞。</lzh>
“The general population knows” means that many people know or have seen or heard about it.

<lzh>不聽者，王不聽活。</lzh>
“Not allowed” means the king hasn’t allowed her to live.

<lzh>剎利眾不聽者，二部不聽活。</lzh>
“The khattiyas haven’t allowed it” means that both parts haven’t allowed her to live.<note> It’s not clear what “both parts” refers to. It might be both parts of the army, as per the origin story. In Mahāsaṅghika saṅghādisesa 8, it’s her own and her husband’s families.</note>

<lzh>僧伽婆尸沙者，是罪屬僧，僧中有殘，因僧前悔過除滅，是名僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>
“A saṅghādisesa” means this offense is dependent upon the sangha, and in the sangha there’s a remainder. Because she confesses and clears it in front of the sangha, therefore it’s called a saṅghādisesa. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若和上尼知、阿闍梨尼知、比丘尼僧知，和上尼犯僧伽婆尸沙；阿闍梨尼，偷蘭遮；僧犯突吉羅。若和上尼知、阿闍梨尼知、僧不知，和上尼犯僧伽婆尸沙；阿闍梨尼，偷蘭遮；僧不犯。和上尼知、阿闍梨尼不知、僧不知，和上尼犯僧伽婆尸沙；阿闍梨尼及僧不犯。若都不知都，不犯。(第八事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If the preceptor knows, the teacher knows, and the bhikkhunī sangha knows, the preceptor commits a saṅghādisesa, the teacher commits a thullaccaya, and the sangha commits a dukkaṭa. If the preceptor knows, the teacher knows, but the sangha doesn’t know, the preceptor commits a saṅghādisesa, the teacher commits a thullaccaya, and the sangha doesn’t commit an offense. If the preceptor knows, but the teacher doesn’t know, and the sangha doesn’t know, the preceptor commits a saṅghādisesa, and the teacher and the sangha don’t commit an offense. If they all don’t know, the offense isn’t committed. (End of rule 8.)
