SarvVb_np22


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，有弟子名施越沙，善好有功德。偷蘭難陀與是弟子一割截衣，著詣祇洹。是比丘尼與跋難陀知舊相識，跋難陀見是比丘尼來，於是衣中心生貪著。是比丘尼頭面禮足一面坐，跋難陀言：「善女！汝衣好可愛。」比丘尼言：「實好。」跋難陀言：「可以施我。」比丘尼言：「我不得與。」跋難陀言：「我當以衣與汝貿。」比丘尼言：「不能。」跋難陀是大法師，辯才能善說法，即為說種種微妙法，令比丘尼生歡喜心，持割截衣與跋難陀，跋難陀即與一可可衣。比丘尼著是衣，入比丘尼精舍，和上尼問言：「汝衣所在？」答言：「與他貿易。」「為與誰貿？」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī had a student named Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand who was virtuous and had merit. Thullanandā gave this student a patchwork robe, which she wore to go to Jetavana. This bhikkhunī and Upananda were old friends. When Upananda saw this bhikkhunī coming, craving and attachment for this robe arose in his mind. The bhikkhunī paid respect with her head at his feet and sat at one side. Upananda said: “Good woman, Your robe is very lovely.” The bhikkhunī said: “Yes, it’s really good.” Upananda said: “Please give it to me.” The bhikkhunī said: “I’m not able to give it.” Upananda said: “I’ll trade the robe with you.” The bhikkhunī said: “I can’t.” Upananda was a great dhamma teacher. He was eloquent and could speak well on dhamma. Then he spoke about various profound states, which aroused gladness in the bhikkhunī’s mind. She took the patchwork robe and gave it to Upananda. Upananda then gave her a mediocre robe. The bhikkhunī then wore this robe and entered the bhikkhunī monastery. Her preceptor asked: “Where’s your robe?” She answered: “I traded it with someone.” “With whom did you trade it?”
<lzh>答言：「與跋難陀。」和上尼言：「跋難陀欺誑誘汝。」弟子言：「若誑若誘已與貿竟。」和上尼言：「是衣價大，汝今所著者價直甚少。」弟子言：「大價小價我以貿竟。」和上尼言：「可還取來，若不得者終身驅汝出。」是弟子畏盡形驅出故，即往索衣言：「本衣還我，我還汝衣。」跋難陀言：「我已貿竟，不還汝衣。」施越沙言：「汝誑我誘我。」答言：「若誑若誘我已貿竟，終不相還。」施越沙言：「若不還我割截衣者，和上尼盡形驅我。」答言：「若驅以不驅我已貿竟。」</lzh>
She answered: “With Upananda.” The preceptor said: “Upananda deceived and scammed you.” The student said: “Whether he deceived or scammed me, the trade is done.” The preceptor said: “That robe’s value was great, but the value of the one you’re wearing now is very low.” The student said: “High value or low value, I’ve already traded it.” The preceptor said: “Please take it back. If you can’t, I’ll expel you for the rest of your life.” Because the student was afraid to be expelled for the rest of her life, she went and asked for the robe: “Return my original robe, I’ll return your robe.” Upananda said: “We’ve already traded. I won’t return your robe.” Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand said: “You deceived and scammed me.” He answered: “Whether I deceived or scammed you, we’ve already traded. It’s final, we won’t return each other’s robes.” Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand said: “If you don’t return my patchwork robe, my preceptor will expel me for the rest of my life.” He answered: “Whether she expels you or doesn’t expel you, we’ve already traded.”

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，呵責施越沙言：「云何名比丘尼，與比丘貿衣，還悔言：『我還汝衣，汝還我衣。』」種種因緣呵已向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問施越沙比丘尼：「汝實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，與比丘貿衣，還悔言：『我還汝衣，汝還我衣。』」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：若比丘尼與比丘貿衣，後到比丘所作是言：『我還汝衣，汝還我衣。』尼薩耆波逸提。」</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they criticized Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you trade a robe with a bhikkhu, return remorsefully, and say: ‘I return your robe, you return mine’?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked Gifts-Exceeding-Grains-of-Sand bhikkhunī: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized her with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhunī when you trade a robe with a bhikkhu, return remorsefully, and say: ‘I return your robe, you return mine’?” Having criticized her with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī trades a robe with a bhikkhu<note> In the pātimokkha, she trades with a bhikkhunī.</note>, and later goes to the bhikkhu and says: “I return your robe, you return mine,” it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>尼薩耆波逸提者，是衣應捨，波逸提罪應悔過。</lzh>
“A nissaggiya pācittiya” means that this robe should be relinquished, and the pācittiya offense should be confessed.

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼與比丘貿衣，後到比丘所作是言：「我還汝衣，汝還我衣。」尼薩耆波逸提。若比丘尼後到比丘所言：「汝衣還屬汝，我衣雖非我許，但與我來。」突吉羅。(第二十二事竟)</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If a bhikkhunī trades a robe with a bhikkhu, and later goes to the bhikkhu and says: “I return your robe, you return mine,” it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya. If a bhikkhunī later goes to the bhikkhu and says: “Your robe is returned to and belongs to you, and even though I don’t need my robe, give it to me anyway,” it’s a dukkaṭa. (End of rule 22.)