SarvVb_pj8


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>佛在俱舍彌國。爾時眾僧一心和合，與迦留羅提舍比丘作不見擯。是迦留羅提舍比丘，有姊妹比丘尼七人：一、偷羅難陀尼，二、周那難陀尼，三、提舍尼，四、優波提舍尼，五、提舍域多尼，六、提舍波羅那尼。七、提舍羅叉多尼。是諸比丘尼，聞迦留羅提舍僧與作不見擯，往問迦留羅提舍言：「僧實與汝作不見擯耶？」答言：「實作是。」諸比丘尼言：「汝莫下意軟語折伏，我等當供養汝財物、衣鉢、戶鉤、時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡形藥，若讀經誦經問疑我等教汝，汝何故折伏？」</lzh>
The Buddha was in Kosambī. At that time, the unanimous and harmonious sangha had expelled Garudatissa bhikkhu for not seeing (an offense). Garudatissa bhikkhu had seven bhikkhunī sisters: 1) Thullanandā bhikkhunī, 2) Sundarinandā bhikkhunī, 3) Tissā bhikkhunī, 4) Upatissā bhikkhunī, 5) Tissavatā bhikkhunī, 6) Tissapālevā(tā) bhikkhunī, and 7) Tissarakkhatā bhikkhunī.<note> The names are my best guess. The sisters are mentioned again in pācittiya 153 with the same names, and in the dhammaka with slightly different names.</note> These bhikkhunīs heard that the sangha had expelled Garudatissa for not seeing (an offense), and they went and asked Garudatissa: “Did the sangha really expel you for not seeing (an offense)?” He answered: “They really did that.” The bhikkhunīs said: “Don’t back down and submit yourself with gentle speech. We’ll support you with requisites, robes, bowls, door hooks, medicines at the proper time, nighttime medicines, seven-day medicines, and lifetime medicines. If while reading and reciting suttas you’ve questions or doubts, we’ll instruct you. Why would you submit?”

<lzh>是中有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，知比丘一心和合僧作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶、不休不息，隨順行？」諸比丘尼如是呵已，向佛廣說。佛以是事集二部僧，知而故問是諸比丘尼：「汝等實作是事不？」答言：「實作。世尊！」佛以種種因緣呵責：「云何名比丘尼，知比丘一心和合僧如法作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶、不休不息，隨順行？」種種因緣呵已，語諸比丘：「以十利故與比丘尼結戒。從今是戒應如是說：</lzh>
Among the bhikkhunīs were those of few wishes, who knew moderation and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, they criticized them: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you know that a bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), that he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist, and you follow him?” When the bhikkhunīs had criticized them like this, they explained it to the Buddha in detail. The Buddha gathered both sanghas because of this matter. He knew, and intentionally asked those bhikkhunīs: “Did you really do this?” They answered: “We really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs when you know that a bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha according to dhamma for not seeing (an offense), that he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist, and you follow him?” Having criticized them with all kinds of reasons, he said to the bhikkhus: “For 10 benefits, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs. From now on, this precept should be recited thus: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>若比丘尼，知是比丘一心和合僧如法作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶、不休不息，隨順行。諸比丘尼，應如是諫是比丘尼：『是比丘，一心和合僧作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶、不休不息，汝莫隨順行。』是比丘尼，諸比丘尼如是諫時，堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘尼應第二、第三諫令捨是事。第二、第三諫時，若捨是事善。若不捨者，是比丘尼犯波羅夷不共住。」</lzh>
‘If a bhikkhunī knows that a bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha according to dhamma for not seeing (an offense), that he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist, and she follows him, the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “That bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), and he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist. Don’t follow him.” When that bhikkhunī is admonished by the other bhikkhunīs in this way, and she holds firmly on to this matter and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her a second and a third time to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika, and doesn’t live in community.’”


<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>知者，若自知、若從他聞、若彼罪比丘自說。</lzh>
“Knowing” means she either knows herself, or hears it from others, or the offender bhikkhu tells her himself.

<lzh>如法者，如法、如毘尼、如佛教擯。</lzh>
“According to dhamma” means an expulsion according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction.

<lzh>獨一無二、無伴無侶者，一切擯比丘尼獨一無二、無伴無侶。</lzh>
“Alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate” means all expelled bhikkhu(nīs)<note> This looks like a typo in the manuscript. From context, it should read “expelled bhikkhus”.</note> are alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate.

<lzh>不休者，不下意、不折伏。</lzh>
“Not stopping” means he doesn’t back down, and doesn’t submit.

<lzh>不息者，不捨惡邪見。</lzh>
“Not desisting” means he doesn’t give up the unwholesome, wrong view.

<lzh>隨順者，有二種：與財、與法。</lzh>
“Following” means there are two kinds: Giving requisites, and giving the dhamma.

<lzh>諸比丘尼應語是擯比丘：「汝應折伏下意向大僧，汝若不折伏下意者，諸比丘尼僧，當作不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨。」若是比丘折伏下意者善，若不折伏悔過者，諸比丘尼，應當一心和合與是比丘作不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨。羯磨法者，一心和合比丘尼僧，一比丘尼唱言：「大德尼僧聽！某甲比丘，一心和合僧作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶、不休不息。若僧時到僧忍聽，與某甲比丘作不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨。是名白。」如是白四羯磨。「僧與某甲比丘作不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！」比丘尼僧，亦應如是語是隨助比丘尼：「是比丘，一心和合僧作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶，不休不息，汝等莫隨順助行。」是比丘尼，諸比丘尼如是諫時，堅持是事不捨者，諸比丘尼應第二、第三諫令捨是事。第二、第三諫時捨是事善，若不捨者，是比丘尼犯波羅夷不共住。</lzh>
The bhikkhunīs should say to the expelled bhikkhu: “You should submit yourself and back down towards the bhikkhu sangha. If you don’t submit and back down, the bhikkhunī sangha will carry out a formal act to not pay respect to you, not talk with you, and not support you.” If the bhikkhu submits himself and backs down, it’s fine. If he doesn’t submit and confess his transgression, the bhikkhunīs should unanimously and harmoniously carry out a formal act to not pay respect to that bhikkhu, to not talk with him, and to not support him. The procedure for the formal act is as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

When the bhikkhunī sangha is unanimous and harmonious, one bhikkhunī should announce: “Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Bhikkhu So-and-so has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), and he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to carry out the formal act to not pay respect to bhikkhu So-and-so, to not talk with him, and to not support him. This is called the motion.” Likewise for the formal act with a motion as fourth. “The sangha has carried out the formal act to not pay respect to bhikkhu So-and-so, to not talk with him, and to not support him. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.” 


<h2>Explanations (continued)</h2>

The bhikkhunī sangha should also say to the bhikkhunī following and supporting him: “That bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), and he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist. Don’t follow and support him.” When that bhikkhunī is admonished by the other bhikkhunīs in this way, and she holds firmly on to this matter and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her a second and a third time to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up at the second or third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika, and doesn’t live in community.

<lzh>波羅夷者，是罪弊惡深重，退墮不如。若比丘尼犯是事者，不名沙門尼、非釋種女，失比丘尼法。</lzh>
“A pārājika” means this offense is low, evil, deep, grave, and an unequalled fall. If a bhikkhunī commits this offense, she’s not called a renunciate, not a Sakyan daughter, and has lost her status as a bhikkhunī.

<lzh>不共住者，諸比丘尼不共作法事，謂白羯磨、白二羯磨、白四羯磨、說戒、自恣、立十三比丘尼羯磨。</lzh>
“Not living in community” means that the bhikkhunīs don’t engage in matters of dhamma with her, that’s to say formal acts with a motion, formal acts with a motion as second, formal acts with a motion as fourth, the recitation of the precepts, the invitation ceremony, or performing the 13 formal acts for bhikkhunīs. 

<lzh>是中犯者，若比丘尼僧，未作不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨。爾時比丘尼教是比丘經，若是偈說，偈偈突吉羅；若是章說，章章突吉羅；若是別句說，句句突吉羅。若擯比丘教比丘尼讀誦經，若比丘尼受偈說，偈偈突吉羅：若受章說，章章突吉羅：若受別句說，句句突吉羅。若比丘尼與財供養、與鉢，突吉羅。與衣，突吉羅。與戶鉤、時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡形藥，皆突吉羅。若擯比丘，與比丘尼財供養、若與衣鉢，比丘尼受者，皆突吉羅。若與戶鉤、時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡形藥，比丘尼受者，皆突吉羅。</lzh>
Herein, this is an offense: If the bhikkhunī sangha hasn’t carried out the formal act to not pay respect, to not talk with him, and to not support him yet, and a bhikkhunī then instructs that bhikkhu in the suttas by reciting in verses, each verse is a dukkaṭa. If she recites in chapters, each chapter is a dukkaṭa. If she recites in another form, each sentence is a dukkaṭa. If the expelled bhikkhu instructs the bhikkhunī to read and recite suttas, and the bhikkhunī receives the recitation in verse, each verse is a dukkaṭa. If she receives the recitation in chapters, each chapter is a dukkaṭa. If she receives the recitation in another form, each sentence is a dukkaṭa. If the bhikkhunī supports him with requisites, and gives a bowl, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she gives a robe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she gives a door hook, medicines at the proper time, nighttime medicines, seven-day medicines, or lifetime medicines, all are dukkaṭas. If the expelled bhikkhu supports the bhikkhunī with requisites, and gives a robe or bowl, and the bhikkhunī accepts it, each is a dukkaṭa. If he gives a door hook, medicines at the proper time, nighttime medicines, seven-day medicines, or lifetime medicines, and the bhikkhunīs accepts it, all are dukkaṭas. 

<lzh>若比丘尼僧，作不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨竟，爾時比丘尼教比丘讀誦經，若是偈說，偈偈偷蘭遮；若章說，章章偷蘭遮；若別句說，句句偷蘭遮。若擯比丘教比丘尼讀誦經，若是偈說，偈偈偷蘭遮；若章說，章章偷蘭遮；若別句說，句句偷蘭遮。若比丘尼，與擯比丘財供養、若與鉢，偷蘭遮。若與衣，偷蘭遮。若與戶鉤、時藥，皆偷蘭遮。夜分藥、七日藥、盡形藥，皆偷蘭遮。若擯比丘，與比丘尼財供養、若與鉢，比丘尼受者，偷蘭遮。若與衣、戶鉤、時藥、夜分藥、七日藥、盡形藥，比丘尼受者，皆偷蘭遮。</lzh>
If the bhikkhunī sangha has carried out the formal act to not pay respect, to not talk with him, and to not support him, and a bhikkhunī then instructs the bhikkhu to read and recite suttas by reciting in verses, each verse is a thullaccaya. If she recites in chapters, each chapter is a thullaccaya. If she recites in another form, each sentence is a thullaccaya. If the expelled bhikkhu instructs the bhikkhunī to read and recite suttas by reciting in verses, each verse is a thullaccaya. If he recites in chapters, each chapter is a thullaccaya. If he recites in another form, each sentence is a thullaccaya. If the bhikkhunī supports the expelled bhikkhu with requisites, and gives a bowl, it’s a thullaccaya. If she gives a robe, it’s a thullaccaya. If she gives a door hook, medicines at the proper time, all are thullaccayas. If she gives nighttime medicines, seven-day medicines, or lifetime medicines, all are thullaccayas. If the expelled bhikkhu supports the bhikkhunī with requisites, and gives a bowl, and the bhikkhunī accepts it, it’s a thullaccaya. If he gives a robe, a door hook, medicines at the proper time, nighttime medicines, seven-day medicines, or lifetime medicines, and the bhikkhunīs accepts it, all are thullaccayas.

<lzh>諸比丘尼，先應軟語教是隨助比丘尼言：「汝莫佐助擯比丘，莫隨順行。」若軟語時捨者，應教令作眾多突吉羅、眾多偷蘭遮悔過出罪。若軟語不捨者，應與白四羯磨約勅。約勅法者，一心和合比丘尼僧，一比丘尼唱言：「大德尼僧聽！某甲比丘，一心和合僧與作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶，不休不息。某甲比丘尼隨助，已軟語約勅不捨。若僧時到僧忍聽，今僧約勅某甲比丘尼：『是比丘，一心和合僧與作不見擯，獨一無二、無伴無侶，不休不息。汝等比丘尼，莫隨順行。』是名白。」如是白四羯磨。「僧約勅某甲比丘尼竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持！」</lzh>
The bhikkhunīs should first instruct that supportive bhikkhunī with gentle speech: “Don’t support an expelled bhikkhu, don’t follow him.” If she gives it up when they speak gently, they should instruct her to confess many dukkaṭas or many thullaccayas to clear the offenses. If she doesn’t give it up with gentle speech, they should admonish her in a formal act with a motion as fourth. The procedure for admonishing her is as follows: When the bhikkhunī sangha is unanimous and harmonious, one bhikkhunī should announce: “Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. Bhikkhu So-and-so has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), and he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist. Bhikkhunī So-and-so follows and supports him. Having been admonished with gentle speech, she didn’t give it up. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now admonishes bhikkhunī So-and-so: ‘That bhikkhu has been expelled by a unanimous, harmonious sangha for not seeing (an offense), and he’s alone without a second person, without a companion, without an associate, but doesn’t stop and doesn’t desist. Bhikkhunī, don’t follow him.’ This is called the motion.” Likewise for the formal act with a motion as fourth. “The sangha has admonished bhikkhunī So-and-so. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.”

<lzh>如佛先說，是諸比丘尼應約勅，乃至三教令捨是事者，是名約勅、是名為教、是名約勅教。若軟語約勅不捨者未犯。若初說未竟說竟、第二說說未竟說竟、第三說說未竟、若非法別眾、非法和合眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾、若如法別眾、異法異律異佛教，若約勅不捨者未犯。若如法、如律、如佛教，三約勅竟不捨者，是比丘尼犯波羅夷。(八波羅夷竟)</lzh>
As the Buddha explained earlier, that bhikkhunī should be admonished up to three times to make her give up this matter. This is called the admonishment, this is called the instruction, this is called the admonishment and instruction. If she doesn’t give it up when being admonished with gentle speech, the offense isn’t committed yet. If when admonished, she doesn’t give it up when the first announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the second announcement isn’t finished yet, when it’s finished, when the third announcement isn’t finished yet, if it’s against the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it’s against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it resembles the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it’s according to dhamma in a divided assembly, or if it’s according to a different dhamma, a different vinaya, and a different Buddha’s instruction, the offense isn’t committed yet. If it’s according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction, and she doesn’t give it up after the third admonishment is finished, that bhikkhunī commits a pārājika. (End of pārājika 8.)
