MgVb_np13




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼勸化作食。語婦人言。優婆夷。我欲與僧作食諸優婆夷信心歡喜與食直。作是言阿梨耶。至作食日語我我當來行食。比丘尼得已自作食及買衣鉢。餘殘作麁食。至其日自來行食。見已問言。阿梨耶我前與食直多。何故食麁乃爾。諸比丘尼言。何處得好食。但自作衣鉢食噉。
諸比丘尼聞已語大愛道。大愛道即以上事往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已佛問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。乃至佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī encouraged people to donate by preparing food, and said to some women: “Laywomen, I want to prepare food for the sangha.” The lay women rejoiced with faith in their minds, gave funds for food, and said: “Venerable, when the day of food preparation comes, tell us. We’ll come and serve it.” When the bhikkhunī had received it, she arranged food for herself, and bought robes and bowls. With the remainder, she prepared coarse food. On the day, she herself went and served the food. When (the lay women) saw this, they asked: “Venerables, we previously gave a lot of funds for food. Why is the food so coarse?” The bhikkhunīs said: “From where should we receive good food? (Thullanandā) only arranged robes, bowls, and food for herself.”
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. … ” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼為食乞。作衣鉢飲食湯藥受用者。尼薩耆波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī asks for food, exchanges it for robes, bowls, drinks, food, liquid remedies, and medicines, and uses them, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。為食者為僧作食。乞者勸化求索。異用者衣鉢自飲食。尼薩耆波夜提。尼薩耆波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼為僧索作食。而自買衣鉢飲食者。尼薩耆波夜提。隨本所欲作應用作者。若迴前食作後食。迴後食作前食者。越比尼罪。若迴食直作床褥。若春夏冬衣分若食分隨先所向應用。而不稱施主本心與。越比尼罪。若比丘尼為僧勸化得食應盡作。若有長飲食酥油。應示檀越。檀越若持去者當默然。若言我與阿梨耶。應言與僧。復言我以自與僧竟。此與阿梨耶。如是取者無罪。是故說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “For food” means to prepare food for the sangha. “Asking” means encouraging to donate, and requesting. “A different purpose” means for robes, bowls, and drinks and food for herself; this is a nissaggiya pācittiya. “A nissaggiya pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī asks for food to prepare for the sangha, but buys robes, bowls, drinks, and food for herself, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya. It should be used according to the initial request. If it was designated for the early meal, and she uses it for the later meal; or if it was designated for the later meal, and she uses it for the early meal, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If the fund was designated for food, and she uses it for beds and mats, (she breaks a minor vinaya rule). If one part is for spring, summer, or winter robes, and one part is for food, it should be used according to the original directions. But if she doesn’t follow the donor’s original intention for the gift, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If a bhikkhunī encourages people to donate for the sangha, and receives food, she should use it all for that. If there are extra drinks, food, ghee, or oil, she should show them to the supporter. If the supporter takes them and leaves, she should keep silent. If they say: “I offer this to the venerable,” she should say: “Give it to the sangha.” If they reply: “I’ve already offered to the sangha. This is offered to the venerable,” and if she takes it then, there is no offense. This is what was said.