MgVb_pc105


Origin Story

佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼度弟子。弟子受具足已棄餘處去。時和上尼嫌言。世尊制戒應教誡弟子。弟子捨我去。我當教誡誰。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何受具足已而餘處去。應二年事和上尼。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī gave the going forth to a student. When the student had received the full ordination, she left her and went to another place. Then the preceptor was upset and said: “The World-honored One has laid down a precept that one should teach and instruct one’s student. But my student has abandoned me and went away. Whom shall I teach and instruct?”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she fully informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you, when you had received the full ordination, go to another place? You should give service to your preceptor for two years.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:


Final Ruling

若比丘尼受具足已。應二年供給隨逐和上尼。若不供給隨逐波夜提。
If a bhikkhunī has received the full ordination, she should attend on and follow her preceptor for two years. If she doesn’t attend on and follow her, it’s a pācittiya.”


Explanation

受具足者共住弟子。二年者二雨時。供給者供給和上尼。應隨逐者不遠離。不供給隨逐者波夜提。若和上尼不善持戒不欲學。弟子作是念。我和上尼但非威儀處行。我若隨逐或傷我梵行。欲全梵行故捨去無罪。若比丘。不供給和上隨侍越毘尼罪。是故世尊說。
“Has received the full ordination” means the student who lives together (with the preceptor). “Two years” means two rains. “Attend on” means to attend on the preceptor. “Should follow her” means not to be far away from her. Not attending on and following is a pācittiya. If the preceptor doesn’t keep the precepts well, and doesn’t want to train, the student should think: “My preceptor only engages in improper conduct. If I follow her, I might harm my monastic life.” If she abandons her and leaves because she wants to keep her monastic life intact, there is no offense. If a bhikkhu doesn’t attend on his preceptor as an attendant, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.