MgVb_pc83


Origin Story

佛住拘睒彌。爾時世尊制戒不得作醫師活命。有人呼闡陀母治病。比丘尼言。世尊制戒不聽。復言。若不聽者授我醫方。即授與俗人外道醫方。諸比丘尼言。但誦醫方此非出家法。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。呼比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽授俗人外道醫方。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止拘睒彌比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha was staying at Kosambī. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down a precept that it’s not allowed to earn a living as a doctor. There were people who summoned Chandamātā to treat illnesses. The bhikkhunī said: “The World-honored One has laid down a precept that it’s not allowed.” They replied: “If it’s not allowed, then teach us medicinal treatments.” She then taught lay people and non-Buddhist renunciates medicinal treatments. The bhikkhunīs said: “She just teaches medicinal treatments, she hasn’t gone forth in the dhamma.”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she fully informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to teach lay people and non-Buddhist renunciates medicinal treatments.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Kosambī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:


Final Ruling

若比丘尼授俗人外道醫方者波夜提。
If a bhikkhunī teaches lay people and non-Buddhist renunciates medicinal treatments, it’s a pācittiya.”


Explanation

比丘尼者如上說。俗人者在家人。外道者出家外道。授醫方者呪蛇呪毒乃至呪火呪星宿日月波夜提波夜提者如上說。比丘尼不得授俗人外道醫方。不得教語。若比丘授俗人外道醫方者越比尼罪。是故世尊說。
“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Laypeople” means householders. “Non-Buddhist renunciates” means those gone forth in another religion. “Teaching medicinal treatments” means magical remedies based on snakes, poisons, … fire, and stellar, lunar, and solar constellations. This is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. A bhikkhunī may not teach lay people and non-Buddhist renunciates medicinal treatments. She may not instruct. If a bhikkhu teaches lay people and non-Buddhist renunciates medicinal treatments, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.