MgVb_pc82


Origin Story

佛住拘睒彌。爾時闡陀母比丘尼善知治病。持根藥葉藥果藥。入王家大臣家居士家。治諸母人胎病眼病。吐下熏咽灌鼻用針刀。然後持此諸藥塗之。由治病故大得供養。諸比丘尼呵言。此非出家法此是醫師耳。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。喚是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。從今日後。不聽作醫師活命。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止拘睒彌比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha was staying at Kosambī. At that time, Chandamātā was skilled at healing diseases. Taking medicines prepared from roots, leaves, and fruits, she entered the households of the king, high ministers, and householders. She treated women who were pregnant, had eye diseases, and were vomiting, and she administered inhalations for throat pain, nasal douches, and performed treatments with needles and knives. Then she took these medicines and applied them. Because she treated these illnesses, she received many offerings. The bhikkhunīs criticized her: “This one hasn’t gone forth in the dhamma, she’s just a doctor.”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and for this reason, she went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. From now on, it’s no longer allowed to earn a living as a doctor.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Kosambī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:


Final Ruling

若比丘尼作醫師活命波夜提。
If a bhikkhunī earns a living as a doctor, it’s a pācittiya.”


Explanation

比丘尼者如上說。醫者持根藥葉藥果藥治病。復有醫呪毒呪蛇乃至呪火呪星宿日月。以此活命如闡陀母者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。比丘尼不得作醫師活命。若有病者得教語治法。比丘作醫師活命者越毘尼罪。是故世尊說。
“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Doctor” means treating illnesses with root, leaf, or fruit medicines. There are also some doctors who provide magical remedies based on poisons, snakes, … fire, and stellar, lunar, and solar constellations. If she earns a living from this like Chandamātā, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. A bhikkhunī may not earn a living as a doctor. If someone is sick, she may give instructions about the methods of treatment. If a bhikkhu earns a living as a doctor, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.