MgVb_pc110


Origin Story

佛住舍衛城。爾時有學戒尼。語偷蘭難陀言。阿梨耶。我學戒滿。與我受具足。答言可爾。後學戒尼言。阿梨耶。我學戒滿與我受具足。聞是語已。自不與受不使人受。又不發遣。諸比丘尼言。汝先許與受具足。何以不與。聞此語猶故不與。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。汝云何許他受具足而不與受。從今已後不聽。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a sikkhamānā. She said to Thullanandā: “Venerable, I’m fully trained in the precepts. Give me the full ordination.” She replied: “Okay.” Later the sikkhamānā said: “Venerable, I’m fully trained in the precepts. Give me the full ordination.” Having heard that statement, (Thullanandā) neither gave her (the ordination) herself, nor had others give it, and also didn’t send her away. The bhikkhunīs said: “Earlier, you agreed to give her the full ordination. Why don’t you give it?” When she heard that, she still didn’t ordain her. 
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she fully informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. Why did you agree to give someone the full ordination, and then not give it? From now on, it’s no longer allowed.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:



Final Ruling

若比丘尼語式叉摩尼言。學戒滿當與汝受具足。後不與受不使人受。又不遣去者波夜提
If a bhikkhunī says to a sikkhamānā: ‘When you’re fully trained in the precepts, I’ll give you the full ordination’, but later doesn’t give it, doesn’t have others give it, and also doesn’t send her away, it’s a pācittiya.”


Explanation

比丘尼者如上說。式叉摩尼者隨順行十八事二歲學。作是語者。如偷蘭難陀比丘尼許與受具足後不與受不使人受波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼語式叉摩尼。當與汝受具足。若後無力者當使人受。若不自受不使人受者。應語令去更餘處受具足。若比丘尼許式叉摩尼受具足。後不與受者波夜提。若比丘許沙彌受具足。後不與受者得越毘尼罪。是故世尊說。
“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “A sikkhamānā” means someone who follows and practises the 18 matters during the two-year training. “Saying” means agreeing like Thullanandā bhikkhunī to give the full ordination, and later neither giving it, nor having others give it; this is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī says to a sikkhamānā: “I’ll give you the full ordination,” but later isn’t able to do that, she should have others give it. If she neither gives it herself, nor has others give it, she should speak with her to make her go elsewhere to receive the full ordination. If a bhikkhunī agrees to give the full ordination to a sikkhamānā, and later doesn’t give it, it’s a pācittiya. If a bhikkhu agrees to give the full ordination to a sāmaṇera, and later doesn’t give it, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.