MgVb_np17


First Origin Story

佛住舍衛城爾時有比丘尼。有垢污僧迦梨。擿已於日中曬。風起吹去。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼是比丘尼來。來已佛問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾世尊。佛言。汝云何擿故僧伽梨已。不自縫不使人縫。
The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a bhikkhunī who had a dirty saṅghāṭī. Having unsewn it, she dried it in the sun. A wind came up and blew it away.
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha said: “Why did you, when you had unsewn an old saṅghāṭī, not sew it back together yourself or had others sew it?


Preliminary Ruling

從今日後。不聽擿衣浣。
From now on, it’s no longer allowed to unsew robes to wash them.”


Second Origin Story

復次爾時有釋種女摩羅女。本是樂人。浣僧伽梨僧伽梨厚重難浣。
語大愛道。大愛道往白世尊。佛言。從今日後。聽至五六日。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。
At another time, there were women from the Sakyan and Mallan clans who originally came from wealthy families.<note: 樂人 “happy-person” is difficult to translate. It renders the Sanskrit term sukumārā, “delicate” (Pāli: sukhumālā).> When washing their saṅghāṭī, the saṅghāṭī was thick, heavy, and hard to wash.
They told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him. The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed up to five or six days.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:


Final Ruling

若比丘尼故僧伽梨若自擿若使人擿。過五六日不自縫不使人縫。除病尼薩耆波夜提。
If a bhikkhunī either unsews an old saṅghāṭī herself, or has someone unsew it, and doesn’t sew it back together, or has others sew it, for more than five or six days, unless she’s sick, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya.”


Explanation

比丘尼者如上說。故僧伽梨者。欲浣若自擿若使人擿五六日者。限齊六日。不還自縫不使人縫尼薩耆波夜提。尼薩耆波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼浣故僧伽梨。若輕而薄者不聽擿。若厚而重者聽擿擿已當浣浣已應舒置箔上。若席上以石鎮四角。乾竟當喚共行弟子依止弟子。同和上阿闍梨諸知識比丘尼速疾共成。若老病無人佐者無罪。是故世尊說。
“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “An old saṅghāṭī” means she wants to wash it, and unsews it herself of has others unsew it. “Five or six days” means a maximum of six days. If she doesn’t restore it by sewing it herself or having others sew it, it’s a nissaggiya pācittiya. “A nissaggiya pācittiya” is as explained above. When a bhikkhunī washes her old saṅghāṭī, if it’s light and thin, it’s not allowed to unsew it. If it’s thick and heavy, it’s allowed to unsew it. Having unsewn it, she should wash it. Having washed it, she should stretch it out, place it on a reed screen, or on a straw mat, and press down the four corners with stones. When it’s dry, she should call the students practising with her, the students depending on her, nuns with the same preceptor or teacher, or some knowledgeable bhikkhunīs to quickly accomplish the work. If she’s old, sick, or has nobody to help, there is no offense. This is what the World-honored One said.