DgVb_ss14


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時佛在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。時有二比丘尼：一名蘇摩、二名婆頗夷，常相親近住、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。餘比丘尼語言：「大姊！汝等二人莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪者，於佛法中有增益安樂住。」而彼猶故不改悔。時諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼：「云何汝等相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。餘比丘尼語言：『大姊！汝莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，於佛法中有增益安樂住。』而彼猶故不改悔？」</lzh>
At that time, the Buddha was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. Then there were two bhikkhunīs, one called Somā and the other called Vappajī, who always lived closely together, and behaved badly together. Their bad reputation spread around, and they covered up each other’s offenses. The other bhikkhunīs said: “Venerable sisters, you two shouldn’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” But they did as before, and didn’t repent. When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs: “Why do you live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses? The other bhikkhunīs have told you: ‘Venerable sisters, don’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.’” But they did as before, and didn’t repent.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊爾時以此因緣集諸比丘僧，呵責蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼：「汝所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。云何汝等共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。餘比丘尼語言：『大姊！汝莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、莫展轉共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流、布展轉共相覆罪，於佛法中有增益安樂住。』而猶不改悔耶？」時世尊以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：「聽僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫捨此事故，白四羯磨。應作如是呵諫。尼眾中應差堪能作羯磨人如上，當作如是白：</lzh>
The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One then for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, a practice not to be followed, shouldn’t be done. Why do you live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses? The other bhikkhunīs have told you: ‘Venerable sisters, don’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.’ But you still haven’t repented?” Then, when the World-honored One had criticized them in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “I allow that the sangha carries out (an act of) criticism and admonishment against Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs to make them give up this matter, in a formal act with a motion as fourth. They should carry out the criticism and admonishment as follows: In the bhikkhunī sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows:


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼，相親近住、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。餘比丘尼諫言：「大姊。汝等莫相親近共作惡行，惡聲流布莫相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布者，於佛法中有增益安樂住。」而彼猶故不改悔。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作訶諫捨此事故：「汝等莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、莫共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、不作惡行惡聲流布，於佛法中有增益安樂住。」白如是。』</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. These bhikkhunīs Somā and Vappajī live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. The other bhikkhunīs have admonished them: “Venerable sisters, don’t live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, behave badly together, and have a bad reputation spread around, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” But they did as before, and didn’t repent. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to carry out the criticism and admonishment for Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs to give up this matter: “Don’t be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, behave badly together, and have a bad reputation spread around, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” This is the motion.’

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼，共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。餘比丘尼語言：「大姊！莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布，於佛法中得增益安樂住。」而彼猶故不改悔。今僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫捨此事故：「汝等莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、莫展轉共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布，於佛法中有增益安樂住。」誰諸大姊忍僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫捨此事者默然，誰不忍者說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三如是說。『僧已忍與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫捨此事竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. These bhikkhunīs Somā and Vappajī live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. The other bhikkhunīs have told them: “Venerable sisters, don’t be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you’re not close together, behave badly together, and have a bad reputation spread around, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” But they did as before, and didn’t repent. The sangha now carries out the criticism and admonishment for Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs to give up this matter: “Don’t be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you’re not close together, behave badly together, and have a bad reputation spread around, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha carries out the criticism and admonishment for Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs to give up this matter should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has accepted to carry out the criticism and admonishment for Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs to give up this matter. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

<lzh>僧作如是呵諫白四羯磨已，白諸比丘，諸比丘往白佛，佛言：「若有如此比丘尼，比丘尼僧亦當與作如是呵責白四羯磨。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼，相親近住、共作惡行惡聲流布、展轉共相覆罪，是比丘尼當諫彼比丘尼言：『大姊！汝等莫相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近，於佛法中得增益安樂住。』是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時，堅持不捨，是比丘尼應三諫捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善；不捨者，是比丘尼犯三法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」</lzh>
When the sangha had carried out the formal act of criticism and admonishment with a motion as fourth like this, they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One said: “If there’s such a bhikkhunī (again), the bhikkhunī sangha should also carry out a formal act of criticism with a motion as fourth like this. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If bhikkhunīs live closely together, behave badly together, their bad reputation spreads around, and they cover up each other’s offenses, the bhikkhunīs should admonish those bhikkhunīs: “Venerable sisters, don’t be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish those bhikkhunīs like this, they hold firmly on to it and don’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish them three times to give up this matter. If they give it up by the third time, it’s fine. If not, those bhikkhunīs commit an offense that should be given up after three admonishments, a saṅghādisesa.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>親近者，數數共戲笑、數數共相調、數數共語。</lzh>
“Closely” means frequently joking together, frequently interacting with each other, frequently speaking together.

<lzh>惡行者，自種華樹教人種、自溉灌教人溉灌、自採華教人採華、自作華鬘教人作、自以線貫教人貫、自持去教人持去、自持鬘去教人持去、自以線貫持去教人線貫持去；設彼村中若人、若童子，共同一床坐起、同一器飲食、言語戲笑、自歌舞唱伎、或他作己唱和、或俳說、或彈鼓簧吹貝、作孔雀鳴或作眾鳥鳴、或走或佯跛行、或嘯或自作弄身、或受雇戲笑。</lzh>
“Behaving badly” means planting flowers and trees themselves, or instructing people to plant them, watering them or instructing people to water them, picking the flowers or instructing people to pick them, making flower garlands or instructing people to make them, stringing them on a thread or instructing people to string them on a thread, wearing (the flowers) and going out or instructing people to wear them and go out, wearing the garlands and going out or instructing people to wear them and go out, wearing the threads and going out or instructing people to wear the threads and go out; settling down in a village, and sitting on one bed and standing up together with an adult or a youth, drinking and eating from the same utensil, talking and joking, singing, dancing, chanting, and acting themselves, singing along with others, doing performances, playing a drum or sounding a conch, imitating the cry of a peacock or other birds, running, walking with a fake limp, whistling, spinning one’s body around, or being hired as an entertainer.

<lzh>惡聲者，惡言流遍四方無不聞者。</lzh>
“A bad reputation” means that bad speech is circulating everywhere in the four directions, and nobody hasn’t heard about it.

<lzh>罪者，除八波羅夷法，覆餘罪者是。</lzh>
“Offenses” means except for the eight pārājika rules, hiding other offenses.

<lzh>若比丘尼，共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。餘比丘尼當諫此比丘尼言：「大姊！汝等莫共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。汝等若不相親近，共作惡行惡聲流布，於佛法中得增益安樂住。汝等宜捨此事，勿為僧所呵諫更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作白。白已當語言：「妹！我已白竟，餘有羯磨在，宜捨此事，莫為僧所呵諫更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作初羯磨。作初羯磨已，當復語言：「妹！已作白初羯磨竟，餘有二羯磨在，可捨此事，莫為僧所呵諫更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作二羯磨。</lzh>
If bhikkhunīs live closely together, behave badly together, their bad reputation spreads around, and they cover up each other’s offenses, the other bhikkhunīs should admonish those bhikkhunīs: “Venerable sisters, don’t be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and cover up each other’s offenses. If you don’t live closely together, behave badly together, and have a bad reputation spread around, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably. You should give up this matter. When you’re criticized and admonished by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If they follow this advice, it’s good. If not, the motion should be carried out. When the motion has been carried out, they should say again: “Younger sisters, we have carried out the motion, the announcements are still left. You should give up this matter. When you’re criticized and admonished by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If they follow this advice, it’s good. If not, the first announcement should be carried out. When the first announcement has been carried out, they should say again: “Younger sisters, we have carried out the motion and the first announcement, two announcements are still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized and admonished by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If they follow this advice, it’s good. If not, the second announcement should be carried out.

<lzh>作二羯磨已，當語言：「妹！已白二羯磨竟，餘有一羯磨在，可捨此事，莫為僧所呵諫更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者說三羯磨竟，僧伽婆尸沙。白已二羯磨竟捨者，三偷羅遮。白已一羯磨竟捨者，二偷羅遮。白已捨者，一偷羅遮。白未竟捨者，突吉羅。未白前共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布者，一切突吉羅。</lzh>
When the second announcement has been carried out, they should say: “Younger sisters, we have carried out the motion and two announcements, one announcement is still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized and admonished by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If they follow this advice, it’s good. If not, when third announcement has been carried out, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If they give it up after the motion and two announcements, they commit three thullaccayas. If they give it up after the motion and one announcement, they commit two thullaccayas. If they give it up after the motion, they commit one thullaccaya. If they give it up when the motion hasn’t yet been fully carried out, it’s a dukkaṭa. If they live closely together, behave badly together, and have a bad reputation spread around before they do the motion, all are dukkaṭas.

<lzh>比丘，隨所犯；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, this is treated according to whatever he committed. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，初語時捨，非法別眾呵諫，非法和合眾、法別眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾，非法非律、非佛所教呵諫，若一切不作呵諫，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if they give it up when first spoken to; if (the sangha) criticizes and admonishes them against the dhamma in a divided assembly; against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly; according to dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly; if they criticize and admonish them against the dhamma and vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching; and if they don’t carry out the criticism and admonishment at all, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(十四竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 14th rule.)
