DgVb_pc142


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時婆伽婆在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。</lzh>
At that time, the Blessed One was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞世尊制戒，聽比丘尼夏安居竟，應往比丘僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。然此諸比丘尼，不往至大僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。</lzh>
Then the bhikkhunīs heard that the World-honored One had laid down a precept and allowed the bhikkhunīs to go to the bhikkhu sangha after the rains retreat, and give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected. But the bhikkhunīs didn’t go to to the bhikkhu sangha to give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞，中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，呵責諸比丘尼言：「云何世尊制戒，聽比丘尼夏安居竟，往大僧中說三事自恣見聞疑，而汝等不往說自恣耶？」即白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊以此因緣集比丘僧，呵責諸比丘尼言：「汝所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。比丘尼夏安居竟，應往大僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。云何不往耶？」以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：「此比丘尼多種有漏處，最初犯戒。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼僧夏安居竟，應往比丘僧中說三事自恣見聞疑，若不者波逸提。」</lzh>
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They criticized these bhikkhunīs: “Why did you, when the World-honored One had laid down a precept and allowed the bhikkhunīs to go to the bhikkhu sangha after the rains retreat, and give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected, not go to to give an invitation?” Then they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha and criticized these bhikkhunīs: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, a practice not to be followed, shouldn’t be done. Bhikkhunīs should go to the bhikkhu sangha after the rains retreat, and give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected. Why didn’t you go?” When he had criticized them in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “These bhikkhunīs have all kinds of taints, and are the first to break this precept. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘A bhikkhunī should go to the bhikkhu sangha after the rains retreat, and give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected. If she doesn’t, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>時世尊既聽比丘尼夏安居竟，應往比丘僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。時諸比丘尼，盡往大僧中說自恣鬧亂。佛言：「不應盡往，自今已去聽差一比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，往比丘僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。作白二羯磨，眾中當差堪能羯磨者如上，當作如是白：『大姊僧聽！若僧時到僧忍聽，僧今差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，往大僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。白如是。』『大姊僧聽！今僧差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，往大僧中說三事自恣見聞疑。誰諸大姊忍僧差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，往大僧中說三事自恣見聞疑者默然，誰不忍者說。』『眾僧已忍差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，往大僧中說三事自恣竟。僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』</lzh>
Then the World-honored One had allowed a bhikkhunī to go to the bhikkhu sangha after the rains retreat, and give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected. The bhikkhunīs all went to the bhikkhu sangha to give the invitation, and they were disturbed and distracted. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t all go. From now on, I allow to choose one bhikkhunī in a formal act with a motion as second, who goes to the bhikkhu sangha and gives the invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected, on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. In the sangha, you should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha now chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha and give the invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected, on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. Now the sangha chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha and give the invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected, on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha and give the invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected, on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak.’ ‘The sangha has accepted to choose bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha and give the invitation in regard to three things on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”


<h2>Explanation (continued)</h2>

<lzh>彼獨行無護，為護故，應差二三比丘尼為伴，往至大僧中禮僧足已，曲身低頭合掌作如是說：『比丘尼僧夏安居竟，比丘僧夏安居竟，比丘尼僧說三事自恣見聞疑。大德慈愍語我，我若見罪，當如法懺悔。』如是第二、第三說。」彼即比丘僧自恣日便自恣而皆疲極。佛言：「不應爾。」比丘僧十四日自恣，比丘尼僧十五日自恣。若大僧病、若別眾、眾不和合、若眾不滿，比丘尼應遣信禮拜問訊，不者突吉羅。若比丘尼眾病、若別眾、若眾不和合、若眾不滿，比丘尼亦當遣信禮拜問訊，不者突吉羅。</lzh>
She went alone without protection, (and the Buddha said:) “You should choose two or three bhikkhunīs as companions for protection. They should go to the bhikkhu sangha and having paid respect at the sangha’s feet, with bent body, lowered head, and joined palms, they should say: ‘The bhikkhunī sangha has finished the rains retreat, and the bhikkhu sangha has finished the rains retreat. The bhikkhunī sangha gives an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected. May the venerables speak with us out of compassion. If we see the offense, we’ll confess it according to dhamma.’ The second and the third time should be recited likewise.” Then they invited on the same day as the bhikkhu sangha did their own invitation, and they were all exhausted. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that. The bhikkhu sangha invites on the fourteenth day, and the bhikkhunī sangha invites on the 15th day.” If the bhikkhu sangha is sick, if the assembly is divided, if the assembly isn’t in harmony, or if the assembly isn’t complete, the bhikkhunīs should send a messenger to pay respect and send greetings. If they don’t, it’s a dukkaṭa. If the bhikkhunī sangha is sick, if the assembly is divided, if the assembly isn’t in harmony, or if the assembly isn’t complete, the bhikkhunīs should also send a messenger to pay respect and send greetings. If they don’t, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，比丘尼僧夏安居竟，比丘僧夏安居竟，比丘尼說三事自恣見聞疑；若比丘十四日自恣，比丘尼十五日自恣，比丘僧病、若別眾、若眾不和合、若眾不滿，比丘尼應遣信往禮拜問訊；比丘尼眾病，乃至眾不滿，亦應遣信禮拜問訊；若水陸道斷、若賊寇惡獸難、河水瀑漲、若命難、梵行難、為強力者所執，若不往問訊，一切無犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if when the bhikkhunī sangha has finished the rains retreat, and the bhikkhu sangha has finished the rains retreat, the bhikkhunīs give an invitation in regard to three things: the seen, the heard, and the suspected, if the bhikkhus invite on the fourteenth day, and the bhikkhunīs invite on the 15th day, if when the bhikkhu sangha is sick, when the assembly is divided, when the assembly isn’t in harmony, or when the assembly isn’t complete, the bhikkhunīs send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings, if when the bhikkhunī sangha is sick, … or when the assembly isn’t complete, they also send a messenger to pay respect and send greetings, if a waterway or overland road has been cut off, if there’s a danger from bandits or savage animals, if a river with a strong current is flooding, if their life is in danger, if their celibacy is in danger, or if they’re held by force, and they do go to greet them, in all cases the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>無犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 142nd rule.)

<lzh>(四十二)</lzh>
