DgVb_pc70


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時婆伽婆在毘舍離獼猴江側高閣堂上。</lzh>
At that time, the Blessed One was in Vesālī, in the hall with the peaked roof near the monkey pond.

<lzh>時異處有蒜園，偷羅難陀比丘尼去園不遠而行，園主問言：「阿姨！欲須蒜耶？」報言：「須蒜。」即持蒜與。此比丘尼得蒜已，後數數復往。去彼不遠而行，其人見已復語言：「阿姨更須蒜耶？」報言：「須！我若得蒜便能食。」即復與蒜。與蒜已勅守園人言：「從今日給比丘尼人各五枚蒜。」時園主留一人守園，自持蒜詣毘舍離賣。偷羅難陀比丘尼還至僧伽藍中，語諸比丘尼言：「汝等知不？某處某甲檀越，日給比丘尼人各五枚蒜，可往迎取。」時偷羅難陀將沙彌尼、式叉摩那即往蒜園，問守蒜人言：「園主何處？」報言：「詣毘舍離賣蒜。」</lzh>
Then there was a garlic field in a different place. Thullanandā bhikkhunī went to the field and walked around closeby. The owner of the field asked her: “Venerable, do you want or need garlic?” She replied: “I need garlic.” Then they took garlic and gave it to her. When this bhikkhunī had obtained the garlic, she afterwards often came again. She went there and walked around closeby, and when the person saw her, they again said: “Venerable, do you need garlic?” She replied: “I need it. If I obtain garlic, I can eat it at my convenience.” Then they gave garlic again. When they had given the garlic, they instructed the guard of the field: “From now on, give each bhikkhunī five bulbs of garlic daily.” Then the owner of the field left the field’s guard alone there, and themselves took garlic and went to Vesālī to sell it. Thullanandā bhikkhunī returned to the monastery and told the bhikkhunīs: “Did you know? In such-and-such a place, the supporter So-and-so gives each bhikkhunī five bulbs of garlic daily. You can go there and take some.” Then Thullanandā lead the sāmaṇerīs and sikkhamānās to the garlic field, and asked the guard of the garlic: “Where is the owner of the field?” They replied: “They went to Vesālī to sell garlic.”

<lzh>時守蒜人言：「何故問耶？」答言：「園主日給比丘尼人各五枚蒜，今可與我。」守蒜人言：「小住！須園主來，我不得自在，我正可守視而已耳。」比丘尼語言：「大家見施，奴不肯與。」偷羅難陀即勅沙彌尼拔取蒜，數知多少，此與上座、次座、和上、阿闍梨，此與同和上、同阿闍梨、親厚知識。此今日食、此明日食、此後日食。即時現園蒜取盡。蒜主還見蒜盡，問守園者言：</lzh>
Then the garlic guard said: “Why do you ask?” She answered: “The owner of the field gives each bhikkhunī five bulbs of garlic daily. Please give them to me now.” The garlic guard said: “Wait a little. I need the owner of the field to come, I’m not allowed to decide this on my own. I can just watch over (the field), that’s all.” The bhikkhunī said: “The great householder saw me and offered, but the slave isn’t willing to give.” Then Thullanandā instructed the sāmaṇerīs to pluck the garlic. She calculated the amount: “This is for the most senior nun, for the other seniors, for the preceptors, for the teachers, for those with the same preceptor as myself, for those with the same teacher as myself, and for my friends and aquaintances. This is to eat today, this is for tomorrow, this is for the day after tomorrow.” Then it became clear that the garlic field had been plucked empty. When the owner of the garlic returned and saw that the garlic was gone, they asked the guard of the field:

<lzh>「蒜何故盡？」答言：「大家！先信樂故，日給比丘尼僧人各五枚蒜，向有沙彌尼、式叉摩那來至我所語我言：『蒜主今為所在？』我答言：『入毘舍離賣蒜。』我問言：『何故問？』答我言：『蒜主日與我人各五枚蒜，今可與我。』我答言：『小住！待園主還，我正守視而已耳，不得自由。』比丘尼言：『大家與我蒜，而奴不肯與我。』時即勅沙彌尼拔取蒜已，數知多少，言：『此與上座、此與次座、此與和上、此與阿闍梨、此與同和上、同阿闍梨、此與親厚知識，此今日食、此明日食、此後日食。』并復並噉，以是故園蒜都盡耳。」園主即譏嫌言：「此比丘尼無有慚愧、受無厭足，外自稱言：『我知正法。』如是何有正法？正使檀越施與，猶應知足，況不見主而取盡。」</lzh>
“Why is there no more garlic?” They answered: “Great householder, previously out of joyous faith, you gave each person of the bhikkhunī sangha five bulbs of garlic daily. A while ago, sāmaṇerīs and sikkhamānās came to me and said to me: ‘Where is the owner of the garlic now?’ I answered: ‘They’ve gone to Vesālī to sell garlic.’ I asked them: “Why do you ask?” They answered me: ‘The owner of the garlic gives each of us five bulbs of garlic daily. Please give them to us now.’ I answered: ‘Wait a little. Wait until the owner of the field returns. I can just watch over (the field), that’s all. I’m not allowed to decide this on my own.’ The bhikkhunī said: ‘The great householder gave me garlic, but the slave isn’t willing to give it to me.’ Then when she had instructed the sāmaṇerīs to pluck the garlic, she calculated the amount: ‘This is for the most senior nun, for the other seniors, for the preceptors, for the teachers, for those with the same preceptor as myself, for those with the same teacher as myself, and for my friends and aquaintances. This is to eat today, this is for tomorrow, this is for the day after tomorrow.’ And moreover she also ate some. For this reason the garlic field is completely empty.” The owner of the field then was upset and said: “This bhikkhunī has no shame and accepts without moderation. Outwardly she praises herself: ‘I know the true dhamma’, how is that the true dhamma? Even if a supporter offers, she should still know moderation, especially if she doesn’t see the owner and takes everything.”

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，呵責偷羅難陀比丘尼：「汝等云何盡拔取他蒜并並噉持去不留遺餘？」時諸比丘尼往白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊以此因緣集比丘僧，呵責偷羅難陀比丘尼言：「汝所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。云何不見主拔取他蒜盡？」爾時世尊以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：</lzh>
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They criticized Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “Why did you pluck all their garlic, and also ate some and took some away without leaving any remainder?” Then the bhikkhunīs went and told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, a practice not to be followed, shouldn’t be done. Why did you, without seeing the owner, pluck all their garlic?” Then, when the World-honored One had criticized her in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: 


<h2>Past Life Story</h2>

<lzh>「往昔有一婆羅門，年百二十形體羸瘦，此婆羅門婦端政無比，多生男女。此婆羅門繫心其婦及諸男女，初不捨離，以此愛著情篤遂至命終，便生雁中，其身毛羽盡為金色。以前福因緣故自識宿命，內自思惟：『我當以何等方便養活此男女使不貧苦？』日日來至其家，日落一金羽而去。男女得之便自思惟：『以何因緣此雁王日來落一金羽與我而去？我等寧可伺其來時方便捉之盡取金羽。』如其所謀，即捉拔取金羽，取已即更生白羽。」佛告諸比丘：「欲知爾時婆羅門死為雁者，豈異人乎！莫作異觀，即園主是。其端政婦多生男女者，即偷羅難陀比丘尼是。男女者，即式叉摩那、沙彌尼等是。以本貪愛故令金羽盡，更生白羽。今復愛故令蒜盡，更得貧窮。」</lzh>
In the past, there was a brahmin who was 120 years old, and weak and feeble. This brahmin’s wife was beautiful beyond compare, and gave birth to many sons and daughters. The brahmin’s mind was tied to his wife and the children, and he just couldn’t abandon them. With this sincere feeling of love and attachment, he reached the end of his life, and was reborn as a goose. The feathers on his body were all golden. Because of previous meritorious causes, he remembered his past lives and thought to himself: “By what means will I care for these children and let them not live in poverty?” Every day, he came to his house, dropped one golden feather, and left. When the children obtained it, they thought to themselves: “For what reason does this king of geese come every day, drop a golden feather for us, and leave? We’d better wait until he comes, plan to catch him, and take all the golden feathers.” As they had planned, they caught him and plucked the golden feathers. When they had taken them, he regrew white feathers.” The Buddha told the bhikkhus: “If you want to know about the brahmin at that time who died and became a goose, how could he be a different person? Don’t think he was someone else, he has become the owner of the field. His beautiful wife who gave birth to many sons and daughters has become Thullanandā bhikkhunī. The sons and daughters have become the sikkhamānās and sāmaṇerīs. Their original craving has made the golden feathers vanish and white feathers appear. And now again their desire has used up the garlic, and they’ve become destitute.”


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

<lzh>世尊以無數方便呵責偷羅難陀比丘尼已，告諸比丘：「此比丘尼多種有漏處，最初犯戒。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼噉蒜者，波逸提。」</lzh>
When the World-honored One had criticized Thullanandā bhikkhunī in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “This bhikkhunī has all kinds of taints, and is the first to break this precept. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī eats garlic, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>若比丘尼噉生蒜、熟蒜、若雜蒜者，咽咽波逸提。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī eats fresh garlic, cooked garlic, or something mixed with garlic, each mouthful is a pācittiya.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，或有如是病，以餅裹蒜食；若餘藥所不治，唯須服蒜差聽服；若塗瘡，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she has a certain illness and eats cakes stuffed with garlic; if other medicines don’t cure her, and she just needs to take garlic to be cured, it’s allowed to take it; or if she applies it on an abscess, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂。痛惱所纏。(七十竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 70th rule.)
