DgVb_ss16


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時佛在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。時六群比丘尼，趣以一小事瞋恚不喜便作是語：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。」時諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責六群比丘尼：「云何汝等，趣以一小事㥲恚不喜作如是語：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行，我等亦可於彼修梵行。』」時諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊以此因緣集諸比丘僧，呵責六群比丘尼言：「云何汝等，趣以一小事㥲恚不喜作是語：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行，我等亦可於彼修梵行。』」</lzh>
At that time, the Buddha was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. Then, the group-of-six bhikkhunīs, just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, said: “We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.” When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked the group-of-six bhikkhunīs: “Why did you, just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, say: ‘We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.’”
Then the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One then for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized the group-of-six bhikkhunīs: “Why did you, just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, say: ‘We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.’?”

<lzh>時世尊以無數方便呵責六群比丘尼已，告諸比丘：「聽僧與六群比丘尼作呵責捨此事故白四羯磨。當作如是呵責。眾中應差堪能羯磨者如上，當作如是白：『大姊僧聽！此六群比丘尼，趣以一小事㥲恚不喜便作是語：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！亦更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。」若僧時到僧忍聽，僧今呵責六群比丘尼捨此事：「大妹！莫趣以一小事㥲恚不憙便作是語：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行，我等亦可於彼修梵行。』」白如是。』</lzh>
Then, when the World-honored One had criticized the group-of-six bhikkhunīs in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “I allow that the sangha carries out (an act of) criticism against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs to make them give up this matter, in a formal act with a motion as fourth. They should carry out the criticism as follows: In the sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. These group-of-six bhikkhunīs just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, said: “We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.” If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to now criticize the group-of-six bhikkhunīs to give up this matter: “Venerable younger sisters, don’t just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, say: “We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.” This is the motion.’

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此六群比丘尼，趣以一小事㥲恚不喜便作是語：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。」今僧與六群比丘尼作呵責，捨此事故：「大姊！莫趣以一小事㥲恚不喜便作是語：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。』」誰諸大姊忍僧為六群比丘尼作呵責捨此事者默然，若不忍者便說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已忍與六群比丘尼作呵責捨此事竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. These group-of-six bhikkhunīs just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, said: “We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.” The sangha now carries out the criticism against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs to give up this matter: “Venerable sisters, don’t just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, say: ‘We renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. We can also practise the monastic life with them.’” Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha carries out the criticism against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs to give up this matter should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has accepted to carry out the criticism against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs to give up this matter. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

<lzh>僧作如是呵責六群比丘尼捨此事白四羯磨已，白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊告諸比丘：「若有如是比丘尼，僧當與呵責白四羯磨。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼趣以一小事㥲恚不憙便作是語：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！亦更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。』是比丘尼當諫彼比丘尼言：『大姊！汝莫趣以一小事㥲恚不喜便作是語：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！亦更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。」』若是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時，堅持不捨，彼比丘尼應三諫捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善；不捨者，是比丘尼犯三法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」</lzh>
When the sangha had carried out the formal act of criticism against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs to give up this matter with a motion as fourth like this, they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One said to the bhikkhus: “If there’s such a bhikkhunī (again), the bhikkhunī sangha should carry out a formal act of criticism with a motion as fourth. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī, just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, says: “I renounce the Buddha, I renounce the dhamma, and I renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. I can also practise the monastic life with them,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Venerable sister, don’t just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, say: ‘I renounce the Buddha, I renounce the dhamma, and I renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. I can also practise the monastic life with them.’” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish that bhikkhunī, she holds firmly on to it and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her three times to give up this matter. If she gives it up by the third time, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits an offense that should be given up after three admonishments, a saṅghādisesa.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>若比丘尼趣以一小事㥲恚不喜便作是語：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！亦更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。」是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼作是語：「大姊！汝莫趣以一小事瞋恚不喜便作是語：『我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。』汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作白。白已當語言：「我已白竟，餘有羯磨在，可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作初羯磨。作初羯磨已當語言：「已作白初羯磨竟，餘有二羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī, just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, says: “I renounce the Buddha, we renounce the dhamma, and we renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. I can also practise the monastic life with them,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Venerable sister, don’t just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, say: ‘I renounce the Buddha, I renounce the dhamma, and I renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. I can also practise the monastic life with them.’ Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the motion should be carried out. When the motion has been carried out, they should say again: “We’ve carried out the motion, the announcements are still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the first announcement should be carried out. When the first announcement has been carried out, they should say again: “We’ve carried out the motion and the first announcement, two announcements are still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.”

<lzh>若隨語者善，不隨語者當作第二羯磨。作第二羯磨已當復語言：「我已作白二羯磨竟，餘有一羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者作三羯磨竟，僧伽婆尸沙。白二羯磨竟捨者，三偷羅遮。白一羯磨竟捨者，二偷羅遮。白竟捨者，一偷羅遮。白未竟捨者，突吉羅。未白前趣以一小事㥲恚不喜便作是語：「我捨佛、捨法、捨僧。不獨有此沙門釋子！更有餘沙門、婆羅門修梵行者，我等亦可於彼修梵行。」一切突吉羅。若僧為如是比丘尼作呵責時，若比丘教言：「莫捨。」若僧作呵責，偷羅遮。若不呵責，突吉羅。若比丘尼教言：「莫捨。」若僧作呵責，偷羅遮。若不呵責，突吉羅。除比丘、比丘尼，教餘人莫捨，呵責不呵責，一切突吉羅。</lzh>
If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the second announcement should be carried out. When the second announcement has been carried out, they should say: “We’ve carried out the motion and two announcements, one announcement is still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, when third announcement has been carried out, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If she gives it up after the motion and two announcements, she commits three thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion and one announcement, she commits two thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion, she commits one thullaccaya. If she gives it up when the motion hasn’t yet been fully carried out, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she just because of a small matter, angry and dissatisfied, says: “I renounce the Buddha, I renounce the dhamma, and I renounce the sangha. There aren’t only the renunciates that are Sakyan children. There are also other renunciates and brahmins who practise the monastic life. I can also practise the monastic life with them” before they do the motion, all are dukkaṭas. If when the sangha carries out the criticism against such a bhikkhunī, a bhikkhu instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if the sangha carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for him). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for him). If a bhikkhunī instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if the sangha carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for her). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for her). If someone other than a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” then whether they criticize her or not, in all cases it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，初語時捨，非法別眾呵責，非法和合眾、法別眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾呵責，非法非律非佛所教，若一切不作呵責，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she gives it up when first spoken to; if (the sangha) criticizes her against the dhamma in a divided assembly; against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly; according to dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly; if they criticize her against the dhamma and vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching; and if they don’t carry out the criticism at all, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(十六竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 16th rule.)