DgVb_ss17


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時佛在拘睒彌瞿師羅園中。時有比丘尼名黑，憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後遂㥲恚作是言：「僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」時諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責黑比丘尼言：「云何憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：『僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』」時諸比丘尼往白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊爾時以是因緣集比丘僧，呵責黑比丘尼言：「汝所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。汝云何憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：『僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』」時世尊以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：「自今已去聽僧與黑比丘尼作呵責捨此事故白四羯磨。當如是作。尼眾中應差堪能羯磨者如上，當作如是白：</lzh>
At that time, the Buddha was in Kosambī in Ghosita’s park. Then, there was a bhikkhunī called Kālī who delighted in quarreling and held on to a dispute without remembering correctly. Later she became angry and said: “The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.” When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked Kālī bhikkhunī: “Why do you delight in quarreling, why did you hold on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily say: ‘The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’?”
Then the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One then for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized Kālī bhikkhunī: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, a practice not to be followed, shouldn’t be done. Why do you delight in quarreling, hold on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily say: ‘The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’?” Then, when the World-honored One had criticized her in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “From now on, I allow that the sangha carries out (an act of) criticism against Kālī bhikkhunī to make her give up this matter, in a formal act with a motion as fourth. It should be done as follows: In the bhikkhunī sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此黑比丘尼，憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：「僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」若僧時到僧忍聽，僧今與黑比丘尼作呵責捨此事故：「大姊！汝莫憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作如是語：『僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』而僧不愛、不恚、不怖、不癡。妹！汝自有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」白如是。』『大姊僧聽！此黑比丘尼，憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：「僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」今僧與黑比丘尼作呵責捨此事：「妹！汝莫憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：『僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』而僧不愛、不恚、不怖、不癡。汝自有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」誰諸大姊忍僧與黑比丘尼作呵責捨此事者默然，誰不忍者便說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已與黑比丘尼作呵責捨此事竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Kālī bhikkhunī delights in quarreling, holds on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily says: “The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.” If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to now criticize Kālī bhikkhunī to give up this matter: “Venerable sister, don’t delight in quarreling, hold on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily say: ‘The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’ The sangha doesn’t have desire, anger, fear, and delusion. Younger sister, you yourself have desire, anger, fear, and delusion.” This is the motion.’ 

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Kālī bhikkhunī delights in quarreling, holds on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily says: “The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.” The sangha now carries out the criticism against Kālī bhikkhunī to give up this matter: “Younger sister, don’t delight in quarreling, hold on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily say: ‘The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’ The sangha doesn’t have desire, anger, fear, and delusion. You yourself have desire, anger, fear, and delusion.” Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha carries out the criticism against Kālī bhikkhunī to give up this matter should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has carried out the criticism against Kālī bhikkhunī to give up this matter. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’” 


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

<lzh>僧與黑比丘尼作呵責白四羯磨已，白諸比丘，諸比丘以此因緣白佛，佛言：「若有如此比丘尼，比丘僧亦當與作呵責白四羯磨。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼，憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：『僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』是比丘尼應諫彼比丘尼言：『妹！汝莫憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：「僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」而僧不愛、不恚、不怖、不癡。汝自有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時堅持不捨，彼比丘尼應三諫，捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善；不捨者，是比丘尼犯三法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」</lzh>
When the sangha had carried out the formal act of criticism against Kālī bhikkhunī with a motion as fourth, they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus for this reason told the Buddha. The Buddha said: “If there’s such a bhikkhunī (again), the bhikkhu(nī)<note> The Chinese text says “bhikkhu”, but it's a typo.</note> sangha should also carry out a formal act of criticism with a motion as fourth. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī delights in quarreling, holds on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later out of anger says: “The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish her thus: “Younger sister, don’t delight in quarreling, don’t hold on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and don’t later out of anger say: ‘The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’ The sangha doesn’t have desire, anger, fear, and delusion. You yourself have desire, anger, fear, and delusion.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish that bhikkhunī, she holds firmly on to it and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her three times to give up this matter. If she gives it up by the third time, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits an offense that should be given up after three admonishments, a saṅghādisesa.’


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>鬪諍有四種：言諍、覓諍、犯諍、事諍。</lzh>
There are four kinds of quarrels: speech-disputes <note> vivādādhikaraṇa</note>, investigation-disputes <note> anuvādādhikaraṇa</note>, offense-disputes <note> āpattādhikaraṇa</note>, and matter-disputes <note> kiccādhikaraṇa</note>.

<lzh>僧者，一羯磨、一說戒。</lzh>
“Sangha” means those who are united in formal acts, and united in the precept recitation. 

<lzh>若比丘尼，憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：「僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」是比丘尼當諫彼比丘尼言：「大姊！汝莫憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚作是語：『僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。』而僧不愛、不恚、不怖、不癡。汝自有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。汝今可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作白。作白已語言：「我已白竟，餘有羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作初羯磨。作初羯磨已當復語言：「我已作初羯磨竟，餘二羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī delights in quarreling, holds on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later out of anger says: “The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Venerable sister, don’t delight in quarreling, hold on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later angrily say: ‘The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’ The sangha doesn’t have desire, anger, fear, and delusion. You yourself have desire, anger, fear, and delusion. Please give up this matter now. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the motion should be carried out. When the motion has been carried out, they should say: “We’ve carried out the motion, the announcements are still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the first announcement should be carried out. When the first announcement has been carried out, they should say again: “We’ve carried out (the motion and) the first announcement, two announcements are still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.”

<lzh>若隨語者善，不隨語者當作二羯磨。作二羯磨已當復語言：「我已作白二羯磨竟，餘有一羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵責更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者作三羯磨竟，僧伽婆尸沙。白二羯磨竟捨者，三偷羅遮。白初羯磨竟捨者，二偷羅遮。白竟捨者，一偷羅遮。白未竟捨者，突吉羅。未白前憙鬪諍不善憶持諍事，後㥲恚言：「僧有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」一切突吉羅。若比丘尼憙鬪諍，僧與呵責時，比丘教言：「莫捨。」若僧作呵責，偷羅遮。若不呵責，突吉羅。若比丘尼教言：「莫捨。」若作呵責，偷羅遮。若不作呵責，突吉羅。除比丘、比丘尼，教餘人莫捨，一切突吉羅。</lzh>
If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the second announcement should be carried out. When the second announcement has been carried out, they should say again: “We’ve carried out the motion and two announcements, one announcement is still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, when third announcement has been carried out, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If she gives it up after the motion and two announcements, she commits three thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion and one announcement, she commits two thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion, she commits one thullaccaya. If she gives it up when the motion hasn’t yet been fully carried out, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she delights in quarreling, holds on to a dispute without remembering correctly, and later out of anger says: “The sangha has desire, anger, fear, and delusion” before they do the motion, all are dukkaṭas. If a bhikkhunī delights in quarreling, and when the sangha criticizes her, a bhikkhu instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if the sangha carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for him). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for him). If a bhikkhunī instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if (the sangha) carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for her). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for her). If someone other than a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” (then whether they criticize her or not,) in all cases it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，初語時捨，非法別眾呵責，非法和合眾、法別眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾，非法非律非佛所教，若一切不作呵責，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she gives it up when first spoken to; if they criticize her against the dhamma in a divided assembly; against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly; according to dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly; (if they criticize her) against the dhamma and vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching; and if they don’t carry out the criticism at all, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(十七竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 17th rule.)