DgVb_ss7


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時世尊在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。時有比丘尼，獨高褰衣渡水，從此岸至彼岸然。彼比丘尼顏貌端政，時有賊見已繫意在彼，令渡水竟便捉觸嬈。諸居士見，皆共嫌之：「此比丘尼不知慚愧、行不淨法，外自稱言：『我知正法。』而獨自行高褰衣渡水，如婬女無異。如是何有正法？」</lzh>
At that time, the World-honored One was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. Then there was a bhikkhunī who hitched up her robes and crossed a body of water alone, and in this way went from the near shore to the far shore. That bhikkhunī was good-looking. Then there was a criminal who, when he had seen her, became attached to her. He let her cross over the water, took hold of her, and molested her. When the householders saw this, they all complained: “This bhikkhunī knows no shame, and engages in impure practices. Outwardly, she praises herself: ‘I know the true dhamma’, but she walks alone, and hitches up her robes to cross a body of water. She’s like a prostitute, there’s no difference. How is that the true dhamma?”

<lzh>爾時差摩比丘尼多諸弟子，去彼僧伽藍不遠有親里村，有少事緣捨眾獨入村，諸居士見共相謂言：「此差摩比丘尼所以獨行者，欲得男子故耳。」彼比丘尼即於彼村中獨宿不還，諸居士復言：「所以獨宿者，正須男子故耳。」</lzh>
At another time, Khemā bhikkhunī had many students. She went to a village not far from the monastery where she had relatives. Because of some small business, she left the group, and entered the village alone. When the householders saw this, they said to each other: “This Khemā bhikkhunī walks alone for a reason. She wants to get a man.” The bhikkhunī then spent the night alone in that village, and didn’t return. The householders said again: “There’s a reason for her to spend the night alone. She really needs a man.”

<lzh>時有六群比丘尼，及偷羅難陀與眾多比丘尼，於拘薩羅國曠野中行。時六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼，常在後獨行下道。諸比丘尼見已語言：「諸妹！汝等何故在後行，不與我等俱？」答言：「汝等但自行，何與汝事？」彼即問言：「汝等不聞佛結戒當共伴相逐行耶？」六群比丘尼、偷羅難陀答言：「汝等不知我耶？」答言：「不知。」彼言：「我等所以在後行者，欲得男子。」</lzh>
At another time, the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā were wandering with a large group of bhikkhunīs through the wilderness in the Kosalan country. Then the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī always walked behind alone off the road. When the bhikkhunīs saw that, they said: “Younger sisters, why do you walk behind, not with us together?” They answered: “Just go by yourselves, why should we take part in your business?” They then asked: “Have you not heard the Buddha lay down a precept that we should wander with a companion?” The group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā answered: “Don’t you know us?” They answered: “We don’t know.” They said: “We walk behind for a reason. We want to get a man.”

<lzh>諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責彼比丘尼：「云何比丘尼，高褰衣渡水、獨行詣村落、獨宿、共伴行而獨在後？」時諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊爾時以此因緣集比丘僧，以無數方便呵責彼比丘尼：「汝所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。云何比丘尼，獨高褰衣渡水、獨行詣村、獨宿共伴行、獨在後？」時世尊以無數方便呵責彼比丘尼已，告諸比丘：「此比丘尼多種有漏處，最初犯戒。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼獨渡水、獨入村、獨宿、獨在後行，犯初法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」</lzh>
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They criticized these bhikkhunīs: “Why does a bhikkhunī hitch up her robes and cross a body of water, walk alone to a village, spend the night alone, or walk with a companion and stay alone behind?” Then the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One then for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized these bhikkhunīs in countless ways: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, not to be followed and practised, shouldn’t be done. Why does a bhikkhunī hitch up her robes and cross a body of water alone, walk alone to a village, spend the night alone, or walk with a companion and stay alone behind?” Then, when the World-honored One had criticized these bhikkhunīs in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “These bhikkhunīs have all kinds of taints, and are the first to break this precept. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī crosses a body of water alone, enters a village alone, spends the night alone, or walks behind alone, she commits an immediate offense that should be given up, a saṅghādisesa.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>水者，河水獨不能渡，彼比丘尼當求一比丘尼共渡，比丘尼應漸褰衣入水待伴。前比丘尼疾疾入水令伴不及，僧伽婆尸沙。若入水時隨水深淺褰衣待後伴，若疾疾入水不待後伴，偷蘭遮。若至彼岸漸漸下衣待後伴。若發意速疾、不漸漸下衣上岸、不待後伴，偷蘭遮。</lzh>
“A body of water” means a river that one can’t cross alone. A bhikkhunī must look for another bhikkhunī to cross together. The bhikkhunī should gradually hitch up her robes as she enters the water, and wait for her companion. If the first bhikkhunī enters the water quickly so that her companion can’t reach her, it’s a saṅghādisesa. When she enters the water, she should hitch up her robes according to the water’s depth, and wait for her companion behind her. If she enters the water quickly, and doesn’t wait for her companion behind, it’s a thullaccaya. When she reaches the far shore, she should gradually lower her robes, and wait for her companion behind her. If she intentionally goes quickly, doesn’t lower her robes gradually when she climbs up the shore, and doesn’t wait for her companion behind her, it’s a thullaccaya.

<lzh>彼比丘尼，當求一比丘尼共行詣村。若比丘尼，獨行詣村隨所至村，僧伽婆尸沙。若無村獨詣空曠無道處行，一鼓聲間，僧伽婆尸沙。獨行未至村，偷蘭遮。減一鼓聲，偷蘭遮。獨行村中一界，突吉羅。求方便欲行而不去，若結伴欲去而不去，一切突吉羅。</lzh>
A bhikkhunī should look for another bhikkhunī to walk to a village together. If a bhikkhunī walks to a village alone, whenever she reaches a village, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If there’s no village and she walks alone in a wilderness without a road for the distance of the sound of a drum, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If she walks alone and hasn’t yet reached a village, it’s a thullaccaya. If the distance is less than the sound of a drum, it’s a thullaccaya. If she walks alone within the territory of a village, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she makes preparations, wanting to go, but then doesn’t go, or if she joins with companion, wanting to go, but then doesn’t go, in all cases it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>彼比丘尼共宿，應在舒手相及處，彼比丘尼獨宿隨脇著地，僧伽婆尸沙。隨轉側，僧伽婆尸沙。若比丘尼共在村中宿，臥時使舒手相及，若舒手不相及，一一轉側，一一僧伽婆尸沙。</lzh>
When bhikkhunīs spend the night together, they should stay within arm’s reach of others. If a bhikkhunī spends the night alone, then whenever her flanks touch the ground, it’s a saṅghādisesa. Whenever she turns over, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If bhikkhunīs spend the night together in a village, when they lie down they should be within arm’s reach of each other. If they’re not within arm’s reach of each other, then whenever they turn around, each time is a saṅghādisesa.

<lzh>彼比丘尼共在道行，不得離見聞處行，若比丘尼在道行離見聞處，僧伽婆尸沙。離見處不離聞處，偷蘭遮。離聞處不離見處，偷蘭遮。</lzh>
When bhikkhunīs walk on a road together, they may not walk out of sight and earshot. If a bhikkhunī walks on a road out of sight and earshot, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If she’s out of sight but not out of earshot, it’s a thullaccaya. If she’s out of earshot but not out of sight, it’s a thullaccaya.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，二比丘尼共渡水，入水時隨水深淺漸漸褰衣，待後伴入水；去時不疾疾去待伴，上岸時漸漸下衣待後伴；或神足渡乘船渡；或橋上渡躡梁渡；若伴比丘尼命終、若休道、若遠行、若賊將去、若命難、或梵行難、或惡獸難、或為強力者將去，被縛將去，或為水所漂，無犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if two bhikkhunīs cross a body of water together; if when she enters the water, she gradually hitches up her robes according to the water’s depth, and waits for her companion behind to enter the water; if when she crosses, she doesn’t go quickly, and waits for her companion; if when she climbs up the shore, she gradually lowers her robes, and waits for her companion behind; if she crosses by psychic powers; if she crosses by boat; if she crosses on a bridge; if she crosses by stepping on a plank; (if she crosses by stepping on stones;)<note> Not all editions of the root text include stepping on stones.</note> if her companion bhikkhunī passes away, disrobes, or goes on a long journey; if she’s abducted by criminals, if her life is in danger, if her celibacy is in danger, if there’s a danger from savage animals, if she’s made to go by force, if she’s arrested and made to go, or if she’s washed away by water, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>若二比丘尼入村，若於村中間一伴比丘尼死、或休道、或遠行、或為賊將去，乃至水所漂如上，無犯。
若共二比丘尼宿，舒手相及處；若一比丘尼出大小便、或受經誦經、若樂靜獨處經行、或為病尼煮羹粥作飯、若命終、若休道、若遠行、若賊將去，乃至為水所漂，亦如上無犯。
與二比丘尼共行，不離見聞處，不犯。若一比丘尼出大小便，或命終、或休道、或為賊所將去，乃至為水所漂，如上不犯。</lzh>
If two bhikkhunīs enter a village, if one companion bhikkhunī dies in between villages, or disrobes, or goes on a long journey, or is abducted by criminals, … , is washed away by water, all as above, the offense isn’t committed.
If two bhikkhunīs spend the night together, and are within arm’s reach, if one bhikkhunī goes to the toilet, or to learn suttas, or to recite suttas, if one wants to do walking meditation in a calm, solitary place, if one cooks curries or porridge or prepares rice for a sick bhikkhunī, if one passes away, disrobes, or goes on a long journey, if one is abducted by criminals, … is washed away by water, all as above, the offense isn’t committed.
If two bhikkhunīs walk together, and if they’re not out of sight and earshot, the offense isn’t committed. If one bhikkhunī goes to the toilet, or dies, disrobes, is abducted by criminals, … is washed away by water, as above, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(七竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the seventh rule.)

<lzh-fascicle-end>四分律卷第二十二</lzh-fascicle-end>
<en-fascicle-end>Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, fascicle 22.</en-fascicle-end>