DgVb_ss15


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時佛在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。時蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼為僧呵諫已，六群比丘尼、偷羅難陀比丘尼教作如是言：「汝等當共住！何以故？我亦見餘比丘尼共住，共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，眾僧以恚故教汝等別住。」時諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼：「僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫已，云何汝等教作如是言：『汝等莫別住！何以故？我亦見諸比丘尼共相親近、作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝等別住。』」</lzh>
At that time, the Buddha was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. When Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs had been criticized and admonished by the sangha, the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī instructed them thus: “You should live together. Why? We’ve also seen other bhikkhunīs live together, be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.” When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī: “The sangha has carried out the criticism and admonishment against Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs. Why do you instruct them thus: ‘Don’t live apart. Why? We’ve also seen bhikkhunīs be close together, behave badly, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart’?”

<lzh>時諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊以此因緣集比丘僧，呵責六群及偷羅難陀比丘尼：「僧為蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫，汝等云何教作如是言：『汝等莫別住！當共住。何以故？我亦見諸比丘尼共住、作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，僧以恚故教汝等別住。』」時世尊以無數方便呵責六群及偷羅難陀比丘尼已，告諸比丘：「聽比丘尼僧與六群及偷羅難陀比丘尼作呵責白四羯磨。當作如是呵。尼眾中應差堪能作羯磨者如上，當作如是白：</lzh>
The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One then for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized the group-of-six and Thullanandā bhikkhunīs: “The sangha has carried out the criticism and admonishment against Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs. Why do you instruct them thus: ‘Don’t live apart. You should live together. Why? We’ve also seen bhikkhunīs live together, behave badly, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart’?” Then, when the World-honored One had criticized the group-of-six and Thullanandā bhikkhunīs in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “I allow that the bhikkhunī sangha carries out (an act of) criticism against the group-of-six and Thullanandā bhikkhunīs to make them give up this matter, in a formal act with a motion as fourth. They should carry out the criticism as follows: In the bhikkhunī sangha, they should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion thus:


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼，僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫，而教作如是言：「汝等莫別住！當共住。何以故？我亦見諸比丘尼共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝等別住。」若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與六群及偷羅難陀比丘尼作呵責捨此事故：「汝莫作如是語言：『莫別住！當共住！』亦莫言：『我亦見諸比丘尼共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝別住。』今正有此二比丘尼，共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，更無有餘。若此比丘尼，不相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布者，於佛法中有增益安樂住。」白如是。』</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. When the sangha had carried out the criticism and admonishment against Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs, these bhikkhunīs of the group-of-six and Thullanandā bhikkhunī instructed them thus: “Don’t live apart. You should live together. Why? We’ve also seen bhikkhunīs be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.” If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to carry out the criticism against the group-of-six and Thullanandā bhikkhunīs to give up this matter: “Don’t say: ‘Don’t live apart. You should live together.’ And also don’t say: ‘We’ve also seen bhikkhunīs be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.’ Now there are really just these two bhikkhunīs who are close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses, there are no others. If these bhikkhunīs aren’t close together, don’t behave badly together, and don’t have a bad reputation spread around, they’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” This is the motion.’

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！此六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼，僧與蘇摩婆頗夷比丘尼作呵諫，而教作如是言：「汝等莫別住！當共住。我亦見諸比丘尼，共相親近、作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝等別住。」僧今與六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼作呵責捨此事故：「汝等莫別住！當共住！莫言：『我亦見諸比丘尼共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝等別住。』今正有此二比丘尼，共相親近、作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，更無有餘。若此比丘尼，不相親近者，於佛法有增益安樂住。」</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. When the sangha had carried out the criticism and admonishment against Somā and Vappajī bhikkhunīs, these group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī have instructed them thus: “Don’t live apart. You should live together. We’ve also seen bhikkhunīs be close together, behave badly, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.” The sangha now carries out the criticism against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī to give up this matter: “(Don’t say:) ‘Don’t live apart. You should live together.’ And also don’t say: ‘We’ve also seen bhikkhunīs be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.’ Now there are really just these two bhikkhunīs who are close together, behave badly, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses, there are no others. If these bhikkhunīs aren’t close together, they’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.”

<lzh>誰諸大姊忍僧為六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼作訶諫捨此事者默然，若不忍者說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已呵諫六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼令捨此事竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」僧為六群比丘尼及偷羅難陀比丘尼作訶諫白四羯磨竟。諸比丘尼白諸比丘，諸比丘往白佛，佛言：「若復有如此比丘尼，僧亦當與作訶諫捨此事白四羯磨。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：</lzh>
Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha carries out the criticism and admonishment against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī to give up this matter should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has criticized and admonished the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī to make them give up this matter. The sangha accepts this, therefore it’s silent. This matter is remembered thus.’” 


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>


When the sangha had carried out the formal act of criticism and admonishment with a motion as fourth against the group-of-six bhikkhunīs and Thullanandā bhikkhunī, they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the Buddha. The Buddha said: “If there’s such a bhikkhunī again, the sangha should also carry out a formal act of criticism and admonishment with a motion as fourth to make her give up this matter. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 

<lzh>若比丘尼，比丘尼僧為作訶諫時，餘比丘尼教作如是言：『汝等莫別住！當共住。我亦見餘比丘尼不別住，共住、作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝別住。』是比丘尼應諫彼比丘尼言：『大姊！汝莫教餘比丘尼言：「汝等莫別住！我亦見餘比丘尼共住、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝別住。」今正有此二比丘尼，共住、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，更無有餘。若此比丘尼別住，於佛法中有增益安樂住。』是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時，堅持不捨，是比丘尼應三諫，令捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善；不捨者，是比丘尼犯三法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」
</lzh>
<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī, when the bhikkhunī sangha carries out criticism and admonishment, instructs other bhikkhunīs thus: “Don’t live apart, you should live together! I’ve also seen other bhikkhunīs who don’t live apart, who live together, behave badly, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Venerable sister, don’t instruct other bhikkhunīs thus: ‘Don’t live apart. I’ve also seen other bhikkhunīs live together, behave badly, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.’ Now there are really just these two bhikkhunīs who live together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses, there are no others. If they live apart, they’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish that bhikkhunī, she holds firmly on to it and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her three times to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up by the third time, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits an offense that should be given up after three admonishments, a saṅghādisesa.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>僧者，如上。</lzh>
“Sangha” is as above.

<lzh>若比丘尼僧為作訶諫時，餘比丘尼教作如是言：「汝等莫別住！當共住。我亦見餘比丘尼共相親近住、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝等別住。」是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼言：「大姊！汝莫教餘比丘尼言：『汝等莫別住！當共住。我亦見餘比丘尼共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝別住。』今正有此二比丘尼，更無有餘。汝等共相親近、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪，若此比丘尼別住者，於佛法有增益安樂住。汝今可捨此事，莫為僧所呵更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作白。作白已，當語言：「大妹！我已作白竟，餘有羯磨在，汝可捨此事。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作初羯磨。</lzh>
If when the sangha carries out criticism and admonishment (against bhikkhunīs), another bhikkhunī instructs them thus: “Don’t live apart, you should live together! I’ve also seen other bhikkhunīs live closely together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart,” the bhikkhunīs should admonish that bhikkhunī: “Venerable sister, don’t instruct other bhikkhunīs thus: ‘Don’t live apart. You should live together. I’ve also seen other bhikkhunīs be close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart.’ Now there are really just these two bhikkhunīs, there are no others. (They)<note> The Chinese text says “you”.</note> are close together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation, and hide each other’s offenses. If these bhikkhunīs live apart, they’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma, and live comfortably. Please give up this matter now. When you’re criticized by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the motion should be carried out. When the motion has been carried out, they should say: “Venerable younger sister, we have carried out the motion, the announcements are still left. Please give up this matter.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the first announcement should be carried out. 

<lzh>作初羯磨竟，當語言：「已白初羯磨竟，餘有二羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵諫更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者當作二羯磨。作二羯磨已，當語言：「妹！已白二羯磨竟，餘有一羯磨在，汝可捨此事，莫為僧所呵諫更犯重罪。」若隨語者善，不隨語者作三羯磨竟，僧伽婆尸沙。白二羯磨竟捨者，三偷蘭遮。白一羯磨竟捨者，二偷蘭遮。白已捨者，一偷蘭遮。白未竟捨者，突吉羅。未白前教言：「汝莫別住！我亦見餘比丘尼共住、共作惡行惡聲流布、共相覆罪。僧以恚故教汝別住。」一切突吉羅。若有如是比丘尼，僧與作呵諫時，若有比丘教言：「莫捨。」若呵責，偷蘭遮。若不呵責，突吉羅。若比丘尼教：「莫捨。」若呵責，偷蘭遮。若未呵，突吉羅。</lzh>
When the first announcement has been carried out, they should say: “We’ve carried out the motion and the first announcement, two announcements are still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized and admonished by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the second announcement should be carried out. When the second announcement has been carried out, they should say: “Younger sister, we have carried out the motion and two announcements, one announcement is still left. Please give up this matter. When you’re criticized and admonished by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, when third announcement has been carried out, it’s a saṅghādisesa. If she gives it up after the motion and two announcements, she commits three thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion and one announcement, she commits two thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion, she commits one thullaccaya. If she gives it up when the motion hasn’t yet been fully carried out, it’s a dukkaṭa. When, before the motion, she instructs them: “Don’t live apart. I’ve also seen other bhikkhunīs live together, behave badly together, have a bad reputation spread around, and hide each other’s offenses. Out of anger, the sangha instructs you to live apart,” all are dukkaṭas. If there’s such a bhikkhunī, and when the sangha criticizes and admonishes her, there’s a bhikkhu who instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if the sangha carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for him). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for him). If a bhikkhunī instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if they carry out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for her). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for her).

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，初語時捨，非法別眾呵責，非法和合眾、法別眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾，非法非律、非佛所教呵責，若一切不呵責，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she gives it up when first spoken to; if they criticize her against the dhamma in a divided assembly; against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly; according to dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a divided assembly; with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly; if they criticize her against the dhamma and vinaya, against the Buddha’s teaching; and if they don’t criticize her at all, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(十五竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 15th rule.)