DgVb_ss12


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時佛在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。時世尊以此因緣集比丘僧，告諸比丘：「自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼，依城邑、若村落住，污他家、行惡行，行惡行亦見亦聞、污他家亦見亦聞，是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼言：『大姊！汝污他家、行惡行，行惡行亦見亦聞、污他家亦見亦聞。大姊！汝污他家、行惡行，今可離此村落去，不須住此。』彼比丘尼語此比丘尼作是言：『大姊！諸比丘尼，有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡，有如是同罪比丘尼，有驅者、有不驅者。』是諸比丘尼語彼比丘尼言：『大姊！莫作是語：「有愛、有恚、有怖、有癡。」亦莫言：「有如是同罪比丘尼，有驅者、有不驅者。」何以故？而諸比丘尼不愛、不恚、不怖、不癡，有如是同罪比丘尼，有驅者、有不驅者。大姊！污他家、行惡行，行惡行亦見亦聞、污他家亦見亦聞。』是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時，堅持不捨，是比丘尼應三諫，捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善；不捨者，是比丘尼犯三法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」(十二竟)</lzh>
At that time, the Buddha was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. Then the World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and said to the bhikkhus: “From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī lives supported by a city or village and corrupts families, engages in unwholesome conduct, and her unwholesome conduct is both seen and heard, and her corruption of families is both seen and heard, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her, saying: “Venerable sister, you corrupt families and engage in unwholesome conduct, and your unwholesome conduct is both seen and heard, and your corruption of families is both seen and heard; venerable sister, you corrupt families and engage in unwholesome conduct, please leave this village now, you mustn’t live here.” If that bhikkhunī then says to the bhikkhunīs: “Venerable sisters, the bhikkhunīs have desire, anger, fear, and delusion. There are bhikkhunīs with the same offense, and some are expelled and some aren’t,” then the bhikkhunīs should answer: “Venerable sister, don’t say: ‘They’ve desire, anger, fear, and delusion.’ Also don’t say: ‘There are bhikkhunīs with the same offense, and some are expelled and some aren’t.’ Why? Because the bhikkhunīs don’t have desire, anger, fear and delusion. (There are no) bhikkhunīs with the same offense, and (it’s not the case that) some are expelled and some aren’t. Venerable sister, you corrupt families and engage in unwholesome conduct, and your unwholesome conduct is both seen and heard, and your corruption of families is both seen and heard.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish that bhikkhunī, she holds firmly on to it and doesn’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish her three times to give up this matter. If she gives it up by the third time, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī commits an offense that should be given up after three admonishments, a saṅghādisesa.’” (End of the 12th rule.)