DgVb_pj8


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時世尊在拘睒彌瞿師羅園中。時尊者闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住。時有比丘尼，名尉次，往返承事闡陀比丘。諸比丘尼語言：「闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，汝莫順從。」尉次答言：「諸大姊！此是我兄，今日不供養，更待何時？」猶故隨順不止。</lzh>
At that time, the World-honored One was in Kosambī in Ghosita’s park. Then the venerable Chanda bhikkhu<note> This bhikkhu is the Pāli tradition’s bhikkhu Channa, who in lay life had been the Buddha’s charioteer.</note> had been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he didn’t comply, didn’t repent, and the sangha hadn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Then there was a bhikkhunī called Weici who went back and forth to look after Chanda bhikkhu. The bhikkhunīs said: “Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Don’t follow him.” Weici answered: “Venerable sisters, this is my older brother. If I don’t support him now, when will I do it?” And she followed him as before, and didn’t stop.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞，其中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責尉次比丘尼言：「闡陀比丘僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，而不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住。汝今云何故順從也？」爾時諸比丘尼語諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊以此因緣集諸比丘僧，呵責尉次比丘尼言：「汝所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，而不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住。云何故順從？」以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：</lzh>
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They criticized Weici bhikkhunī: “Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Why do you now follow him?” Then the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and criticized Weici bhikkhunī: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, a practice not to be followed, shouldn’t be done. Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Why do you follow him?” When he had criticized her in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: 

<lzh>「聽僧與尉次比丘尼作呵責白四羯磨。當作如是呵責，尼眾中應差堪能人，若上座、若次座、若誦律、若不誦律，堪能作羯磨者作如是白：『大姊僧聽！是尉次比丘尼，知闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，而不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，而順從闡陀比丘。諸比丘尼語言：「闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，汝莫順從。」而故順從。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與尉次比丘尼作呵責，捨此事故。「大姊！闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，而不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住。汝莫隨順。」白如是。』</lzh>
“I allow that the sangha carries out a formal act of criticism with a motion as fourth against Weici bhikkhunī. They should carry out the criticism as follows: In the bhikkhunī sangha, they should choose a capable person, the most senior nun, or the nun next in line, or a vinaya reciter, or someone who doesn’t recite vinaya but who is capable of carrying out a formal act. She should carry out the motion as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Weici bhikkhunī knows that Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but that he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and that the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again, and still follows him. The bhikkhunīs have told her: “Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Don’t follow him.” But she follows him as before. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to carry out the criticism against Weici bhikkhunī to give up this matter: “Venerable sister, Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Don’t follow him.” This is the motion.’

<lzh>『大姊僧聽！是尉次比丘尼，知闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，而順從闡陀比丘。諸比丘尼語言：「闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，汝莫隨順。」而故隨順。僧今與尉次比丘尼作呵責，捨此事故。「闡陀比丘，僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，汝莫隨順。」誰諸大姊忍僧與尉次比丘尼作呵責捨此事者默然，誰不忍者說。是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『僧已與尉次比丘尼作呵責捨此事竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』當作如是呵責。」</lzh>
‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. This Weici bhikkhunī knows that Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but that he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and that the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again, and still follows him. The bhikkhunīs have told her: “Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Don’t follow him.” But she follows him as before. The sangha now carries out the criticism against Weici bhikkhunī to give up this matter: “Chanda bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again. Don’t follow him.” Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha carries out the criticism against Weici bhikkhunī to give up this matter should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and the third should be recited likewise. ‘The sangha has carried out the criticism against Weici bhikkhunī to give up this matter. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’ 


<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>


The criticism should be done like this.”

<lzh>尉次比丘尼，僧與作白四羯磨已，白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊，世尊言：「若有如此比丘尼順從為僧所舉比丘者，僧亦應如是與作呵責白四羯磨。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼，知比丘僧為作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住而順從。諸比丘尼語言：『大姊！此比丘，為僧所舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，汝莫順從。』如是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時，是事堅持不捨，彼比丘尼應乃至第二、第三諫，令捨此事故。若乃至三諫，捨者善；若不捨者，是比丘尼波羅夷，不共住，犯隨舉。」</lzh>
When the sangha had carried out the formal act with a motion as fourth against Weici bhikkhunī, they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One said: “If there’s such a bhikkhunī who follows a bhikkhu suspended by the sangha, the sangha should also carry out a formal act of criticism with a motion as fourth like this. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī knows that a bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but that he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and that the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again, and she still follows him, the bhikkhunīs should say: “Venerable sister, this bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again; don’t follow him.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish that bhikkhunī like this, she holds firmly on to this matter and doesn’t give it up, she should be admonished a second and third time to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up by the third admonishment, it’s fine. If not, that bhikkhunī is pārājika, and doesn’t live in community, because she committed the act of following a suspended one.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>僧者如上。</lzh>
“Sangha” is as above.

<lzh>舉者，為僧所舉，白四羯磨是也。</lzh>
“Suspended” means suspended by the sangha, in a formal act with a motion as fourth.

<lzh>法者，如法如律、如佛所教。</lzh>
“Dhamma” means, according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching.

<lzh>不順從者，不順治罪法。</lzh>
“Doesn’t comply” means doesn’t follow the procedures for clearing the offense.

<lzh>不懺悔者，所犯罪未懺悔清淨。</lzh>
“Doesn’t repent” means depending on the offense he committed, he hasn’t yet repented and purified it.

<lzh>僧未與作共住者，僧未與解罪羯磨。</lzh>
“The sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again” means the sangha hasn’t yet done the formal act to release him from the offense.

<lzh>隨順者，有二種：一法，二衣食。法隨順者，教增戒、增心、增慧，教語學問、誦經。衣食者，與飲食、衣服、床、臥具、病瘦醫藥。</lzh>
“Following him” means there are two kinds: One, in dhamma. Two, with robes and food. “Following in dhamma” means teaching him in the higher virtue, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom, teaching him knowledge and the recitation of suttas. “With robes and food” means giving him drinks and food, clothes, beds, bedding, and medicines for illnesses.

<lzh>若比丘尼，知比丘為僧所舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不隨順、不懺悔，僧未與作共住而隨順。諸比丘尼語言：「此比丘，僧與作舉，如法如律、如佛所教，不順從、不懺悔，僧未與作共住，汝莫隨順，可捨此事，莫為僧所舉更犯重罪。」若隨語者善；不隨語者，當作白。白已當復語言：「妹！當知我白已，餘有羯磨在，汝捨此事，莫為僧所舉更犯重罪。」若隨語者善；不隨語者，當作初羯磨。作初羯磨已，當語言：「妹！我已與汝作白初羯磨竟，餘有二羯磨在。汝可捨此事，莫為僧所舉更犯重罪。」若隨語者善；不隨語者，當作第二羯磨。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī knows that a bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but that he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and that the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again, and still follows him, the bhikkhunīs should say: “This bhikkhu has been suspended by the sangha according to dhamma and vinaya, according to the Buddha’s teaching, but he doesn’t comply, doesn’t repent, and the sangha hasn’t yet allowed him back to live with the community again; don’t follow him. Please give up this matter; when you’re being charged by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the motion should be carried out. When the motion has been carried out, they should say again: “Younger sister, you should know that we have carried out the motion, the announcements are still left. Give up this matter; when you’re being charged by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the first announcement should be carried out. When the first announcement has been carried out, they should say: “Younger sister, we have carried out the motion and the first announcement for you, two announcements are still left. Please give up this matter; when you’re being charged by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, the second announcement should be carried out.

<lzh>作第二羯磨已，當復語言：「妹知不？我已作白二羯磨竟，餘有一羯磨在，汝捨此事，莫為僧所舉更犯重罪。」若隨語者善；不隨語者，作第三羯磨竟，波羅夷。白二羯磨竟捨者，三偷蘭遮。白一羯磨竟捨者，二偷蘭遮。白竟捨者，一偷蘭遮。若作白未竟捨者，突吉羅。若未白前隨順所舉比丘者，一切突吉羅。若僧為隨舉比丘尼作呵責時，有比丘教言：「汝莫捨。」若僧與作呵責，偷蘭遮。若不呵責，突吉羅。若比丘尼語言：「莫捨。」若僧與呵責，偷蘭遮。若不呵責，突吉羅。除比丘、比丘尼，餘人教：「莫捨。」呵責不呵責，一切突吉羅。</lzh>
When the second announcement has been carried out, they should say again: “Younger sister, do you know? We’ve carried out the motion and two announcements, one announcement is still left. Give up this matter; when you’re being charged by the sangha, don’t commit a heavy offense.” If she follows this advice, it’s good. If not, when third announcement has been carried out, it’s a pārājika. If she gives it up after the motion and two announcements, she commits three thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion and one announcement, she commits two thullaccayas. If she gives it up after the motion, she commits one thullaccaya. If she gives it up when the motion hasn’t yet been fully carried out, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she follows a suspended bhikkhu before they do the motion, in all cases it’s a dukkaṭa. If when the sangha carries out the criticism for the charged bhikkhunī, a bhikkhu instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” and if the sangha carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya (for him). If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa (for him). If a bhikkhunī says: “Don’t give it up,” and if the sangha carries out the criticism, it’s a thullaccaya. If they don’t carry out the criticism, it’s a dukkaṭa. If someone other than a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī instructs her: “Don’t give it up,” then whether they criticize her or not, in all cases it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，初諫時捨，非法別眾、非法和合眾、法別眾、似法別眾、似法和合眾、異法異毘尼異佛所教，一切未作呵責前，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she gives it up at the first admonishment, if it was done against the dhamma in a divided assembly, if it was done against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it was done according to dhamma in a divided assembly, if it was done with what resembles dhamma in a divided assembly, if it was done with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if it was done with a different dhamma, a different vinaya, or different teachings of the Buddha, and if the criticism hasn’t yet been carried out at all, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(八竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the eighth rule.)