DgVb_pj1

<lzh-fascicle-start>四分律卷第二十二（二分一明尼戒法）
姚秦罽賓三藏佛陀耶舍共竺佛念等譯
八波羅夷法</lzh-fascicle-start>
<en-fascicle-start>Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, fascicle 22 (Part 2.1, explanation of the bhikkhunī rules.)
Translated by the Kāśmīra Tipiṭaka master Buddhayaśas together with Zhú Fóniàn in the later Qin state.
The eight pārājika rules</en-fascicle-start>


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時世尊在毘舍離獼猴江邊樓閣講堂上。時世尊以此因緣集諸比丘僧，告言：「自今已去，我與諸比丘尼結戒，集十句義：一、攝取於僧，二、令僧歡喜，三、令僧安樂，四、令未信者信，五、已信者令增長，六、難調順者令調順，七、慚愧者得安樂，八、斷現在有漏，九、斷未來有漏，十、正法得久住。欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼，作婬欲犯不淨行，乃至共畜生，是比丘尼波羅夷，不共住。」</lzh>
At that time, the World-honored One was in Vesālī, in the hall with the peaked roof near the monkey pond. Then the World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and said: “From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: 1. For the cohesion of the sangha. 2. For the happiness of the sangha. 3. For the comfort of the sangha. 4. To let those without faith acquire faith. 5. To let the faithful increase in faith. 6. To restrain those difficult to restrain. 7. So that those who are conscientious are comfortable. 8. To eliminate present taints. 9. To eliminate future taints. 10. So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If a bhikkhunī engages in sexual intercourse, and commits impure practices, even with an animal, that bhikkhuni is pārājika, and doesn’t live in community.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>若比丘尼者，名字為比丘尼、相似比丘尼、自稱比丘尼、善來比丘尼、乞求比丘尼、著割截衣比丘尼、破結使比丘尼、受大戒白四羯磨如法成就得處所比丘尼。是中比丘尼，若受大戒白四羯磨如法成就得處所，住比丘尼法中，是謂比丘尼義。</lzh>
“If a bhikkhunī” means a bhikkhunī by name, someone who looks like a bhikkhunī, a self-proclaimed bhikkhunī, an ehi-bhikkhunī, a bhikkhunī by begging, a bhikkhunī by wearing a patchwork robe, a bhikkhunī by destroying the defilements, a bhikkhunī who has received the full ordination by a formal act with a motion as fourth, accomplished according to dhamma, fit to stand. Among these, the bhikkhunī, who has received the full ordination by a formal act with a motion as fourth, accomplished according to dhamma, fit to stand, and abides by the bhikkhunī rules, is meant by “a bhikkhunī”.

<lzh>作婬欲犯不淨行乃至共畜生者，所可得行婬處者是。</lzh>
“Engaging in sexual intercourse, and committing impure practices, even together with an animal” means that by which one may be able to engage in sexual intercourse.

<lzh>波羅夷者，譬如人斷頭不可復起，比丘尼亦復如是，犯波羅夷已不復成比丘尼，故名波羅夷。</lzh>
“Pārājika” means: as a person with their head cut off can’t get up again, the bhikkhunī is also like this. When she has committed a pārājika, she can’t become a bhikkhunī again, therefore it’s called pārājika.

<lzh>云何名不共住，有二不共住：一羯磨、一說戒。彼比丘尼，不得於是二事中住，是故名不共住。</lzh>
What is called “doesn’t live in community”? There are two kinds of non-living in community: The first is with regard to formal acts, the second with regard to the precept recitation. That bhikkhunī may not be present at these two things. Therefore it’s called “doesn’t live in community”.

<lzh>有三處行婬，波羅夷：人、非人、畜生，於此三處共行婬，犯波羅夷。復於三種男行婬，犯波羅夷：人男、非人男、畜生男，於此三處共行婬犯波羅夷。於三種二形行婬，犯波羅夷：人二形、非人二形、畜生二形，於此三處二形共行婬，波羅夷。於三種黃門行婬，犯波羅夷：人黃門、非人黃門、畜生黃門，於此三處行婬，波羅夷。</lzh>
There are three ways of engaging in sexual intercourse that are pārājika: With a human, with a non-human, and with an animal. If she engages in sexual intercourse of these three kinds, she commits a pārājika. Also, if she engages in sexual intercourse with three kinds of males, she commits a pārājika: A human man, a non-human man, and a male animal. If she engages in sexual intercourse with these three kinds, she commits a pārājika. Also, if she engages in sexual intercourse with three kinds of intersex beings, she commits a pārājika: A human intersex person, a non-human intersex person, and an intersexual animal. If she engages in sexual intercourse with these three kinds of intersex beings, she’s pārājika. If she engages in sexual intercourse with three kinds of eunuchs, she commits a pārājika: A human eunuch, a non-human eunuch, and an animal eunuch. If she engages in sexual intercourse with these three kinds, she’s pārājika.

<lzh>比丘尼有婬心，捉人男根，著三處：大小便道及口，入者犯；不入者，不犯。有隔有隔、有隔無隔、無隔有隔、無隔無隔，波羅夷。非人男、畜生男、二形男黃門亦如是。比丘尼有婬心，捉眠男子及死者身未壞者、少壞者男根入三處，入者犯；不入，不犯。有隔有隔、有隔無隔、無隔有隔、無隔無隔，波羅夷。非人男、畜生男、二形男、黃門亦如上。若比丘尼，為賊所捉，將詣人男所，以彼男根著三處。初入覺樂、入已樂、出時樂，波羅夷。初入樂、入已樂、出時不樂，波羅夷。初入樂、入已不樂、出時樂，波羅夷。初入樂、入已不樂、出時不樂，波羅夷。初入不樂、入已不樂、出時樂，波羅夷。初入不樂、入已樂、出時不樂，波羅夷。初入不樂、入已樂、出時樂，波羅夷，此是第六句。有隔乃至無隔無隔，亦如上。非人男、畜生男、二形男、黃門，有隔乃至無隔無隔，亦如上。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī with a lustful mind takes a man’s penis, and puts it into three places: the anus, the vagina, or the mouth, if it enters, she commits the offense. If it doesn’t enter, she doesn’t commit it. If both use protection, or one uses protection and the other doesn’t, or one doesn’t use protection and the other does, or both don’t use protection, she’s pārājika. With a non-human man, a male animal, an intersex man, and a eunuch, it’s also the same. If a bhikkhunī with a lustful mind takes a sleeping man’s penis, or a dead man’s whose body hasn’t decomposed yet, or only decomposed a little, and has it enter in the three places, if it enters, she commits the offense. If it doesn’t enter, she doesn’t commit it. If both use protection, or one uses protection and the other doesn’t, or one doesn’t use protection and the other does, or both don’t use protection, she’s pārājika. With a non-human man, a male animal, an intersex man, and a eunuch, it’s also the same. If a bhikkhunī is seized by a criminal, and taken to a man, and puts his penis into three places, if she feels pleasure when it’s entering, after it has entered, and when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. If she feels pleasure when it’s entering, and after it has entered, but not when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. If she feels pleasure when it’s entering, but not after it has entered, and again feels pleasure when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. If she feels pleasure when it’s entering, but not after it has entered and when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. If she doesn’t feel pleasure when it’s entering and after it has entered, but feels pleasure when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. If she doesn’t feel pleasure when it’s entering, but feels pleasure after it has entered, and doesn’t feel pleasure when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. If she doesn’t feel pleasure when it’s entering, but feels pleasure after it has entered and when it’s removed, she’s pārājika. This is the sixth sentence.<note> Actually, there are seven sentences.</note> If both use protection, … or both don’t use protection, it’s also as above. With a non-human man, a male animal, an intersex man, and a eunuch, if both use protection, … or both don’t use protection, it’s also as above.

<lzh>若比丘尼為賊所捉，將至眠男子所及死者身未壞、少壞者所，以彼男根著三處，初入樂、入已樂乃至初入不樂、入已不樂、出時樂，亦如上。有隔有隔乃至無隔無隔，亦如上。乃至黃門，亦如上。有隔有隔乃至無隔無隔，亦如上。若比丘尼為賊所捉，於三處行婬，從初入樂、入已樂、出時樂，乃至初入不樂、入已不樂、出時樂，亦如上。有隔有隔乃至無隔無隔，亦如上。若比丘尼方便欲行不淨，若作者，波羅夷；不作者，偷蘭遮。比丘方便教比丘尼犯婬，作者偷蘭遮；不作者，突吉羅。比丘尼教比丘尼犯婬，作者偷蘭遮；不作者，突吉羅。除比丘、比丘尼，教餘者，作、不作，一切突吉羅。</lzh>
If a bhikkhunī is seized by a criminal, and taken to a sleeping man, or a dead man whose body hasn’t decomposed yet, or only decomposed a little, and puts his penis into three places, if she feels pleasure when it’s entering, … If she doesn’t feel pleasure when it’s entering and after it has entered, but feels pleasure when it’s removed, it’s also as above. If both use protection, … or both don’t use protection, it’s also as above. … With a eunuch, it’s also as above. If both use protection, … or both don’t use protection, it’s also as above. If a bhikkhunī is seized by a criminal, and engages in sexual intercourse in the three places, if she feels pleasure when it’s entering, after it has entered, and when it’s removed … If she doesn’t feel pleasure when it’s entering and after it has entered, but feels pleasure when it’s removed, it’s also as above. If both use protection, … or both don’t use protection, it’s also as above.
If a bhikkhunī plans and wished to engage in impure conduct, and if she does it, it’s a pārājika. If she doesn’t do it, it it a thullaccaya. If a bhikkhu plans to instruct a bhikkhunī to commit sexual intercourse, and if she does it, it’s a thullaccaya. If she doesn’t do it, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī instructs another bhikkhunī to commit sexual intercourse, and if the other does it, it’s a thullaccaya. If she doesn’t do it, it it a dukkaṭa. If one instructs someone else, except for a bhikkhu or a bhikkhunī, whether they do it or not, in all cases it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>比丘，波羅夷；式叉摩那、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅滅擯。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, this is a pārājika. For a sikkhamānā, a sāmaṇera, and a sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa, and they’re permanently expelled. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，眠無所覺、知不受樂、一切無欲心，不犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s asleep and doesn’t wake up, if she knows and doesn’t feel pleasure, and in all cases where she has a mind without lust, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>不犯者，最初未結戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。(一竟)</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t been laid down yet, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the first rule.)