DgVb_pc141


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時婆伽婆在舍衛國祇樹給孤獨園。</lzh>
At that time, the Blessed One was in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s park.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞世尊制戒，聽諸比丘尼僧半月從比丘僧求教授，而彼比丘尼不往求教授。</lzh>
Then the bhikkhunīs heard that the World-honored One had laid down a precept and allowed the bhikkhunī sangha to ask the bhikkhu sangha for instruction every half-month. But the bhikkhunīs didn’t go to ask for instruction.

<lzh>時諸比丘尼聞，中有少欲知足、行頭陀、樂學戒、知慚愧者，嫌責諸比丘尼言：「汝等聞世尊制戒，聽比丘尼僧半月從比丘僧求教授，而汝等云何不往求教授耶？」即白諸比丘，諸比丘往白世尊。世尊以此因緣集比丘僧，呵責諸比丘尼言：「汝等所為非，非威儀、非沙門法、非淨行、非隨順行，所不應為。云何汝等不往比丘僧中求教授耶？」以無數方便呵責已，告諸比丘：「此比丘尼多種有漏處，最初犯戒。自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼，半月應往比丘僧中求教授，若不求者，波逸提。」</lzh>
When the bhikkhunīs heard this, there were among them those with few wishes, who knew moderation, who practised the austerities, who were keen on training in the precepts, and who knew shame. They rebuked these bhikkhunīs: “Why did you, when you heard that the World-honored One had laid down a precept and allowed the bhikkhunī sangha to ask the bhikkhu sangha for instruction every half-month, not go to ask for instruction?” Then they told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus went and told the World-honored One. The World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha and criticized these bhikkhunīs: “What you did is wrong, is improper conduct, against the rules of renunciates, an impure practice, a practice not to be followed, shouldn’t be done. Why did you not go to the bhikkhu sangha to ask for instruction?” When he had criticized them in countless ways, he said to the bhikkhus: “These bhikkhunīs have all kinds of taints, and are the first to break this precept. From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘A bhikkhunī should go to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month to ask for instruction. If she doesn’t ask, it’s a pācittiya.’”


<h2>Explanation</h2>

<lzh>比丘尼義如上。</lzh>
The meaning of “bhikkhunī” is as above.

<lzh>世尊有如是教，比丘尼半月應往比丘僧中求教授，而彼一切盡往求，以是故眾便鬧亂。佛言：「不應一切往，聽差一比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，半月往比丘僧中求教授，白二羯磨。應如是差。眾中當差堪能羯磨者如上，作如是白：『大姊僧聽！若僧時到僧忍聽，差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，半月往比丘僧中求教授。白如是。』『大姊僧聽！今僧差某甲比丘尼為比丘尼僧故，半月往比丘僧中求教授。誰諸大姊忍僧差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，半月往比丘僧中求教授者默然，誰不忍者說。』『僧已忍差某甲比丘尼，為比丘尼僧故，半月往比丘僧中求教授竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』</lzh>
The World-honored One gave such a teaching that a bhikkhunī should go to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month to ask for instruction. So they all went together and asked, and because of this, the sangha was disturbed and distracted. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t all go. I allow to choose one bhikkhunī in a formal act with a motion as second, who goes to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month and asks for instruction on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. You should choose her as follows: In the sangha, you should choose a capable person who can carry out formal acts as above. She should carry out the motion as follows: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve to choose bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month and ask for instruction on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. This is the motion.’ ‘Venerable sisters, may the sangha listen. Now the sangha chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month and ask for instruction on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. Those of the venerable sisters who accept that the sangha chooses bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month and ask for instruction on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha should remain silent. Those who don’t accept this should speak.’ ‘The sangha has accepted to choose bhikkhunī So-and-so to go to the bhikkhu sangha every half-month and ask for instruction on behalf of the bhikkhunī sangha. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”


<h2>Explanation (continued)</h2>

<lzh>彼獨行無護，聽為護故應差二、三比丘尼共行。彼當往大僧中禮僧足已，曲身低頭合掌作如是說：『比丘尼僧和合，禮比丘僧足求教授。』如是第二、第三說。」時彼比丘尼，待僧說戒竟，經久住立疲極。佛言：「不應爾，聽囑一大比丘便去。」世尊既聽囑授，彼便囑授客比丘。佛言：「不應爾。」彼便囑授遠行者。佛言：「不應爾。」彼囑授病者。佛言：「不應爾。」彼囑授無智慧者。佛言：「不應爾。」彼既囑授已，明日不往問。佛言：「應往問可不？比丘應期往，比丘尼應期來迎。比丘期往而不往者，突吉羅。比丘尼期迎而不迎者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
She went alone without protection, and (the Buddha) allowed: “You should choose two or three bhikkhunīs to go together for protection. They should go to the bhikkhu sangha and having paid respect at the sangha’s feet, with bent body, lowered head, and joined palms, they should say: ‘The bhikkhunī sangha in harmony pays respect at the bhikkhu sangha’s feet and asks for instruction.’ The second and the third time should be recited likewise.” Then the bhikkhunīs waited until the (bhikkhu) sangha had recited the precepts and because they stood there for a long time, they were exhausted. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that. I allow to inform one senior bhikkhu and then to immediately leave.” When the World-honored One had allowed to inform, they then informed each bhikkhu. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They then informed someone going on a long journey. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They informed a sick person. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” They informed someone without wisdom. The Buddha said: “You shouldn’t do that.” Having informed someone, they didn’t go again the next day to ask. The Buddha said: “You should go and ask if they can do it or not.” The bhikkhu should go at the set time and the bhikkhunīs should welcome him at the set time. If the bhikkhu sets a time to go, but doesn’t go, it’s a dukkaṭa. If the bhikkhunīs set a time to welcome him, but don’t welcome him, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>若比丘尼聞教授人來，當半由旬迎，在寺內供給所須洗浴具、若羹粥、飯食、果蓏以此供養，若不者突吉羅。若比丘僧盡病，應遣信往禮拜問訊，若別眾、若眾不和合、若眾不滿，當遣信往禮拜問訊。若比丘尼僧盡病，亦當遣信往禮拜問訊。若別眾、若尼眾不和合、若眾不滿，亦當遣信往禮拜問訊，若不往者突吉羅。</lzh>
If the bhikkhunīs hear that the instructor is coming, they should welcome him half a yojana away, and provide inside the monastery what he needs: bathing equipment, curries, porridge, rice, and fruits. They offer these things to him. If they don’t, it’s a dukkaṭa. If the whole bhikkhu sangha is sick, they<note> “They” probably refers to the bhikkhunīs, as becomes clear in the parallel passage in the next precept, pācittiya 142.</note> should send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings. If the (bhikkhu) assembly is divided, if the assembly isn’t in harmony, or if the assembly isn’t complete, they should send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings. If the whole bhikkhunī sangha is sick, they should also send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings. If the (bhikkhunī) assembly is divided, if the bhikkhunī assembly isn’t in harmony, or if the assembly isn’t complete, they should also send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings. If they don’t go, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>比丘，突吉羅。是謂為犯。</lzh>
For a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. This is called “to commit”.

<lzh>不犯者，半月往大僧中求教授；今日囑、明日問；比丘期而往，比丘尼期而來迎；彼聞教授人來半由旬迎，在寺內供給洗浴具、飯食、羹粥、果蓏，以此供養；若大僧有病，應遣信往禮拜問訊，若別眾、眾不和合、若眾不滿，遣信往禮拜問訊；若比丘尼僧病，若別眾、若眾不和合、若眾不滿，亦應遣信禮拜問訊；若水陸道斷、賊寇惡獸難、若河水瀑漲、若為強力所執、若被繫閉、命難、梵行難，如是眾難不遣信問訊者，無犯。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if they go to the bhikkhu sangha and ask for instruction every half-month, if they inform today and ask tomorrow, if the bhikkhu sets a time and goes and the bhikkhunīs set a time and come to welcome him, if when they hear that the instructor is coming, they welcome him half a yojana away, and inside the monastery provide bathing equipment, rice, curries, porridge, and fruits; they offer these things to him; if when the bhikkhu sangha is sick, they send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings, if when the (bhikkhu) assembly is divided, when the assembly isn’t in harmony, or when the assembly isn’t complete, they send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings, if when the bhikkhunī sangha is sick, when the (bhikkhunī) assembly is divided, when the assembly isn’t in harmony, or when the assembly isn’t complete, they also send a messenger to go, pay respect, and send greetings, if a waterway or overland road has been cut off, if there’s a danger from bandits or savage animals, if a river with a strong current is flooding, if they’re held by force, if they’re imprisoned, if their life is in danger, or if their celibacy is in danger, and because of these many difficulties they don’t send a messenger to greet them, the offense isn’t committed.

<lzh>無犯者，最初未制戒，癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。</lzh>
“Not committed” means if she’s the first offender when the precept hadn’t yet been laid down, if she’s mad, if she’s distracted, or if she’s overcome with pain. (End of the 141st rule.)

<lzh>(四十一)</lzh>
