DgVb_ss11


<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>爾時佛在羅閱城耆闍崛山中。時世尊以此因緣集比丘僧，告諸比丘：「自今已去與比丘尼結戒，集十句義乃至正法久住，欲說戒者當如是說：若比丘尼有餘比丘尼群黨，若一、若二、若三乃至無數，彼比丘尼語是比丘尼言：『大姊！汝莫諫此比丘尼。此比丘尼，是法語比丘尼、律語比丘尼。此比丘尼所說，我等心憙樂。此比丘尼所說，我等忍可。』是比丘尼語彼比丘尼言：『大姊！莫作是說言：「此比丘尼，是法語比丘尼、律語比丘尼。此比丘尼所說，我等憙樂。此比丘尼所說，我等忍可。」何以故？此比丘尼所說，非法語、非律語。大姊！莫欲破壞和合僧，當樂欲和合僧。大姊！與僧和合歡喜不諍，同一師學如水乳合，於佛法中有增益安樂住。』是比丘尼諫彼比丘尼時，堅持不捨，是比丘尼應三諫，捨此事故。乃至三諫捨者善；不捨者，是比丘尼犯三法應捨，僧伽婆尸沙。」(十一竟)</lzh>
At that time, the Buddha was in Rājagaha on Vulture’s peak. Then the World-honored One for this reason gathered the bhikkhu sangha, and said to the bhikkhus: “From now on, I’ll lay down a precept for the bhikkhunīs, and state the 10 principles: … So that the true dhamma may last long. Someone wishing to recite the precept should recite like this: 


<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

‘If the bhikkhunī has a faction of other bhikkhunīs, one, two, three, or up to innumerably many, and if they say to the bhikkhunīs: “Venerable sisters, don’t admonish this bhikkhunī. This bhikkhunī is a bhikkhunī who speaks the dhamma and the vinaya. Our minds delight in what this bhikkhunī says, and we approve of it,” the bhikkhunīs should tell them: “Venerable sisters, don’t say this: ‘This bhikkhunī is a bhikkhunī who speaks the dhamma and the vinaya. Our minds delight in what this bhikkhunī says, and we approve of it.’ Why? What this bhikkhunī says is not the dhamma and the vinaya. Venerable sisters, don’t wish to split and destroy the sangha in harmony, you should delight in a sangha in harmony. Venerable sisters, when you’re in harmony with the sangha, happy, and without quarreling, training under one teacher, mixing like water and milk, you’ll grow in the Buddha’s dhamma and live comfortably.” If when the bhikkhunīs admonish those bhikkhunīs, they hold firmly on to it and don’t give it up, the bhikkhunīs should admonish them three times to give up this matter. If they give it up by the third time, it’s fine. If not, those bhikkhunīs commit an offense that should be given up after three admonishments, a saṅghādisesa.’” (End of the 11th rule.)