MgPn21


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時諸比丘集。不知作舉羯磨。令比丘尼作已。比丘尼心生疑悔。語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。此上尊眾汝云何與作舉羯磨。從今已後不聽與比丘作舉羯磨。若比丘中都無能者。得授使誦。作羯磨時若不得者遙授無罪。若比丘尼。與比丘作羯磨者越比尼罪。比丘得與比丘尼作羯磨無罪。是名羯磨。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhus gathered but didn’t know how to carry out an act of suspension. After they had a bhikkhunī carry it out, the bhikkhunī became doubtful and remorseful. She told Mahāpajāpatī, and she then went and informed the World-honored One about this matter. The Buddha said: “This is the respected bhikkhu sangha. Why did you carry out an act of suspension for them? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to carry out an act of suspension for the bhikkhus. If there is no one among the bhikkhus who can do it, she may teach them how to recite. When the formal act is carried out, if they still can’t do it, and she prompts them from a distance, there is no offense. If a bhikkhunī carries out a formal act for bhikkhus, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. A bhikkhu may carry out a formal act for bhikkhunīs without offense. This is called the rule on formal acts.




MgPn22


<beginchinese>佛住比舍離。爾時跋陀羅比丘尼。著憍奢耶衣到親里家。道路值暴雨。如視水精舉見身體。眾人圍繞欲看。於是蹲地。依止弟子在邊而障。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至答言。實爾世尊。佛言。從今已後。比丘尼不聽著憍舍耶衣。憍奢耶者有二種。一者生二者作。生者細絲。作者紡絲。著細絲憍奢耶越比尼。著紡絲越比尼心悔。比丘著無罪。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Vesālī. At that time, Bhaddā bhikkhunī put on a silk robe, and went to her relatives’ house. On the road, she was caught in a rainstorm. (The robe) became transparent like crystal, and her whole body was visible. A crowd of people walked around her and wanted to look at her. So she crouched down. The student depending on her stood at her side to shield her off. For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed for a bhikkhunī to wear silk robes. ‘Silk’ means the two kinds: raw silk and processed silk. ‘Raw’ means fine threads. ‘Processed’ means spun thread. If she wears fine-thread silk, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she wears spun-thread silk, she transgresses against vinaya and should mentally repent. If a bhikkhu wears it, there is no offense.”




MgPn23


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼大乳。著一僧祇支於閣上經行。俗人遙見自相謂言。看是似如水上浮瓠。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。從今日後。當作覆肩衣。覆肩衣者。襞疊拕覆肩上。若不作不著越比尼罪。不聽比丘尼高處著一重僧祇支經行。若屏處著一重僧祇支無罪。是名僧祇支。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī had big breasts. Just wearing her vest, she did walking meditation on the roof of the temple building. Laypeople saw her from afar, and said to each other: “Look at this. It’s like bottle gourds floating on water.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “From now on, you should make a shoulder-covering robe. ‘A shoulder-covering robe’ means a cloth with pleats to spread over and cover the shoulders. If (a bhikkhunī) doesn’t make one, or doesn’t wear it, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. It’s not allowed for a bhikkhunī to do walking meditation on a high place while wearing only a one-layered vest. If she wears a one-layered vest in a secluded place, there is no offense.” This is called the rule on vests.




MgPn24


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時釋種女摩羅女梨車女貴勝家女出家善知莊嚴。有嫁女娶婦。皆借倩莊嚴。得好飲食。為世人所譏。此非出家人。是客莊嚴人耳。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。從今已後。不聽莊嚴女人。莊嚴者。梳頭莊眼粉面朱脣。著嚴飾服以自活命者越比尼罪。若有頭痛眼痛得磨著藥無罪。是名莊嚴法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, women from the Sakyan, Mallan, and Licchavi clans, and from aristocratic families, who had gone forth, knew well how to beautify people. Brides all came to be made up. So (the bhikkhunīs) received good food and drinks. Laypeople blamed them: “These aren’t renunciates. They’re just makeup artists.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to beautify women. ‘Beautifying’ means if (a bhikkhunī) combs someone’s hair, applies eye makeup, powders their face, applies red lipstick, or makes them wear ornamented clothes, to make a living, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she has a headache or eye pain, she may apply and wear medicine without offense.” This is called the rule on beautification.




MgPn25


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時釋種女摩羅女大姓家女出家。種優鉢羅華取而賣之。為世人之所譏。此非出家人。此是賣華女耳。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今已後。不聽種華賣以自活命。若比丘尼種優鉢羅華以自活命者越比尼罪。為塔為供養佛故無罪。是名優鉢羅華。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, women from the Sakyan, Mallan, and other great clans had gone forth. They planted blue lotus flowers and sold them. Laypeople blamed them: “These aren’t renunciates, they’re just flower vendors.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed the World-honored One … They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to make a living by planting and selling flowers. If a bhikkhunī makes a living by planting blue lotus flowers, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If they’re for a stupa or an offering to the Buddha, there is no offense.” This is called the rule on blue lotus flowers.




MgPn26


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼種須曼那華。乃至為塔供養佛故無罪。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhunīs planted jasmine (sumanā) flowers. … If they’re for a stupa or an offering to the Buddha, there is no offense.”




MgPn27


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時世尊制戒。不聽種華樹。爾時釋種女摩羅女出家。結華鬘賣以自活命。為世人所譏。此非出家人。此是賣華鬘女耳。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。從今日後。不聽結華鬘。鬘者。優鉢羅華摩梨華須曼那華。結作鬘賣活命者越比尼罪。若佛生時大會菩提大會轉法輪大會阿難大會羅睺羅大會五年大會。檀越言阿梨耶佐我結鬘爾時得結種種鬘無罪。是名結鬘法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, had laid down the precept that it’s not allowed to to plant flowers and trees. Then women from the Sakyan and Mallan clans, who had gone forth, bound and sold flower garlands to make a living. Laypeople blamed them: “These aren’t renunciates, they’re just flower-garland vendors.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to bind flower garlands. ‘A garland’ means with blue lotus, mallikā-jasmine, or sumanā-jasmine flowers. If (a bhikkhunī) binds garlands, and sells them to make a living, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If during the great festivals for the Buddha’s birthday, for his awakening, for the turning of the wheel of dhamma, for Ānanda, for Rāhula, or the great festival every five years, a supporter says: ‘Venerables, help me bind garlands’, then she may bind all kinds of garlands without offense.” This is called the rule on binding garlands.




MgPn28


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時釋種女摩羅女梨車女出家。紡縷而賣為世人所嫌。此非出家人。此是賣縷人也。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。從今已後。不聽紡縷。紡縷者。劫貝縷芻摩縷憍舍耶縷舍那麻縷紡縷。賣活命者越比尼罪。若欲作漉水囊腰帶紡者無罪。是名紡縷法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, women from the Sakyan, Mallan, and Licchavi clans had gone forth. They spun thread and sold it. Laypeople blamed them: “These aren’t renunciates, they’re just thread vendors.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to spin thread. ‘Spinning thread’ means cotton, linen, silk, sunn hemp, or hemp thread. (If a bhikkhunī) spins thread, and sells it to make a living, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she wants to make a water filter or a belt, and spins, there is no offense.” This is called the rule on spinning thread.




MgPn29


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時須提那死婦出家。其叔常欲使罷道。時比丘尼入聚落乞食。叔遇見之即欲捉取。便走入一大家內。語婦人言。異事幾當壞我梵行。問何故。答言。叔欲罷我道。婦人言。莫恐我當相護。比丘尼言。我欲向和上邊去。婦人言。汝欲去者當著俗服假異摽相。乃可得脫。即著臂釧耳鐶俗人服飾。又將四五人侍從而去。其叔於外見之念言。此非比丘尼。是俗人耳。到住處已諸比丘尼呵言。汝何故著此。答言。我叔欲取我。方便自護故假著此耳。諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事具白世尊。佛言。呼比丘尼來。來已佛問汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。汝云何壞威儀。從今已後。不聽壞威儀。若決定壞威儀者非比丘尼。若方便自護故壞威儀越比尼罪。故名比丘尼。若比丘尼決定壞威儀者偷蘭遮。若方便自護無罪。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Sudinna had died, and his wife went forth. But her brother-in-law constantly wanted to make her disrobe. Then the bhikkhunī entered the village on almsround. Her brother-in-law met her, and then wanted to get hold of her. So she entered a great house, and said to the woman: “Something unusual happened. I nearly was raped.” She asked “Why?” (The bhikkhunī) answered: “My brother-in-law wants to disrobe me.” The woman said: “Don’t worry, I’ll protect you.” The bhikkhunī said: “I want to go and be with my preceptor.” The woman said: “If you want to go, you should put on lay clothes to give you a different appearance. Then you can escape.” So she put on bracelets and earrings, and lay clothes and accessories. And attended on by four or five people, she left. Her brother-in-law saw her outside, and thought: “This isn’t the bhikkhunī. It’s just a lay woman.” When she reached her residence, the bhikkhunīs criticized her: “Why are you wearing this?” She answered: “My brother-in-law wanted to get hold of me. As a means to protect me, I put on these things.” The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she then fully informed the World-honored One of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “Why did you break proper conduct? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to break proper conduct. If (a bhikkhunī) decides to break proper conduct, she’s no longer a bhikkhunī. If as a means to protect herself she breaks proper conduct, she breaks a minor vinaya rule, but she’s still a bhikkhunī. If a bhikkhu(nī)<note: This must be a typo in the source text. It only makes sense to read it as “bhikkhu”.> decides to break proper conduct, it’s a thullaccaya. If it’s a means to protect himself, there is no offense.” 




Summary Verse


<beginchinese>羯磨憍舍耶 僧祇支客嚴
種花須曼那 結鬘并紡縷
壞威儀最後 第三跋渠竟<endchinese>

Saṅghakamma, silk, the vest, beautifying clients,
Planting flowers, jasmine, binding garlands, spinning thread,
And finally breaking proper conduct, the third chapter is finished.




MgPn30


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼乞食詣一大家。時有婦人墮胎。語言。為我棄之。答言不能。又請我當顧爾許物。即取以鉢盛之而去。時大迦葉乞食恒作此念。最初得食。當施與若比丘比丘尼。見此比丘尼已語言。取鉢來。即覆不示。又復更呼。亦復不示。大迦葉性有威風。厲聲而喚。即戰怖而示。見已言。咄汝何故作此惡法。時大迦葉語諸比丘尼。諸比丘尼。以是因緣往白世尊。乃至答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事非法。汝云何覆鉢。從今日後不聽覆鉢。復不聽露捉。得食已當覆。若見比丘時當舉覆示之。若露持鉢越比尼罪。見比丘不示亦越比尼罪。是名鉢事。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī reached a great house on almsround. Then there was a woman who had had a miscarriage. She said: “Throw this away for me.” (Thullanandā) said: “I can’t.” (The woman) asked again: “I’ll provide such-and-such things.” Then (Thullanandā) placed it into her bowl, and left. At that time, Mahākassapa was on a continuous almsround and thought: “The first food I obtain, I’ll give to a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī.” When he saw the bhikkhunī, he said: “Come and bring your bowl.” But she covered it, and didn’t show it to him. He called her again, but she still didn’t show it. Mahākassapa had a imposing personality, and he called out in a stern voice. Then, terrified, she showed it to him. When he saw it, he said: “Hey, why did you do this bad thing?” Then Mahākassapa told the bhikkhunīs, and for this reason, they went and informed the World-honored One … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing against the dhamma. Why did you cover your bowl? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to cover one’s bowl. It’s also not allowed to carry it openly. When (a bhikkhunī) has received food, she should cover it. If she sees a bhikkhu, she should lift the cover, and show him the bowl. If she carries the bowl openly, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she sees a bhikkhu, and doesn’t show it to him, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is called the rule on bowls.