MgPn1


<beginchinese>明雜跋渠初 <endchinese>

Beginning of the explanation of the collection of miscellaneous rules. 


<beginchinese>坐法者<endchinese>

The rule on sitting


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼初夜後夜加趺而坐。時有蛇來入瘡門中。諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。應與某甲藥。蛇不死而還出。即與藥而出。佛言。汝云何加趺而坐。從今已後不聽。坐法者當屈一脚以一脚跟掩瘡門。若比丘尼加趺坐越比尼罪。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī, in the early and late parts of the night, sat down in lotus position. Then a snake came and entered her vagina. The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī and she for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “You should give her such-and-such a medicine. The snake won’t die, but come out again.” Then they gave her the medicine, and it came out. The Buddha said: “Why did you sit down in lotus position? From now on, it’s no longer allowed. The method to sit is to bend one foot, and to cover the vagina with the heel of the other foot.” If a bhikkhunī sits down in lotus position, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.




MgPn2


<beginchinese>簟席法者。
佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼敷簟席縫衣。竹篾傷小便道血出。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。佛言。從今日後不聽比丘尼坐竹席。若縫衣時。若在講堂溫室。巨摩塗地已縫衣。若無者當敷著床上若膝上縫。若於竹簟席上坐越比尼罪。是名席法。<endchinese>

The rule on bamboo mats
The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī spread out a bamboo mat to sew a robe. A bamboo splinter hurt her vagina and it bled. The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed for a bhikkhunī to sit on a bamboo mat. When sewing a robe, she should sew it in the dhamma hall, the sauna, or in a large smoothed out area. If there are no such places, she should spread it out on the bed or on her knees to sew it. If she sits on a bamboo mat, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on bamboo mats.




MgPn3


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀與眾多女人。到阿耆羅河脫衣洗浴。比丘尼先出。取女人莊嚴腰物纏腰已。語女人言看我好不。諸女人言。我食欲人纏腰使細。欲令夫主愛念。阿梨耶。用是何為。比丘尼聞已以。是事具白大愛道。乃至答言實爾。世尊。佛言。此是惡事。從今已後。不聽比丘尼纏腰。若用女人纏腰物纏腰越比尼罪。若有癰瘡纏腰無罪。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā went to the river Aciravatī with a large group of women. They removed their clothes and bathed. The bhikkhunī was the first to come out, and she picked up a woman’s hip ornament. Having bound it around her hips, she said to the women: “Look, do I look good?” The women said: “We’re lustful people. We bind our hips to look delicate, and because we want to make our husbands think about love. Venerable, what do you use this for?” When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they fully informed Mahāpajāpatī about this matter. … She answered: “I really did this, World-honored One.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. From now on, it’s no longer allowed for a bhikkhunī to bind her hips. If she uses an item that women bind around the hips, and binds it around her hips, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she has an abscess and bandages her hips, there is no offense.”




MgPn4


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼共眾多女人。到阿耆羅河邊。脫衣放一處入水洗浴。先出岸上著女人襏衣。語諸女人言。看我宜著不。女人言。我是俗人著此已。欲令夫主愛念。汝用著是為。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽著襏衣。襏衣者。珂貝琉璃真珠玉金銀摩尼如是比。莊嚴陰衣不聽著。下至結縷作陰衣相。越比尼罪。若陰上有癰瘡裹者無罪。是名襏衣。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī went to the river Aciravatī with a large group of women. They removed their clothes, put them in one spot, and entered the water to bathe. (Thullanandā) came out first onto the riverbank, put on a woman’s lingerie, and said to the women: “Look, does this suit me?” The women said: “We’re worldly people. When we wear this, we want to make our husbands think about love. What use do you have for wearing this?” The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to wear lingerie. ‘Lingerie’ means underwear decorated with shells, beryl, pearls, jade, gold, silver, gems, or any similar items may not be worn. Even if she just ties threads to make something resembling an undergarment, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she has an abscess on the vagina and she bandages it, there is no offense.” This is called the rule on lingerie.




MgPn5


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。乃至洗浴。先出著女人莊嚴服。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽著女人莊飾服。女人服者。頭上光鍱額耳鐶鈴瓔珞指鐶臂釧脚釧如是比。一切女人嚴飾服不聽著。若著者越比尼罪。若身有癰瘡。以藥塗纏無罪。是名女人嚴飾服。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. … to bathe. (Thullanandā) came out first and put on a woman’s ornaments. The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to wear women’s ornaments. ‘Women’s ornaments’ means diadems, earrings, bells, necklaces, fingerrings, bracelets for arms and legs, and similar items. All women’s ornaments may not be worn. If (a bhikkhunī) wears one, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she has an abscess on her body, and she applies medicine and bandages it, there is no offense.” This is called the rule on women’s ornaments.




MgPn6


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼度釋種女摩羅女梨車女大富家女。合嚴飾服而度出家。時諸貧家有女出門。及節會日行來皆從借賃。為世人所譏。此賃衣人非出家法。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。乃至答言實爾。佛言從今日後。不聽合女人嚴飾服度出家。當令捨已而度。捨者若女人來欲出家者。應令捨俗人嚴身具。若作是念。某時或穀貴乞食難得。或老病當須湯藥。女人少能得物。當置人家。若女人持俗嚴飾服來。合度出家者越比尼罪。是名合嚴飾服出家。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, bhikkhunīs gave the going forth to women from the Sakyan, Mallan, and Licchavi clans, as well as from very wealthy families. They brought their ornamented dresses when they went forth. When women from poor families were getting married, they all came on the wedding day and rented (the dresses) from them. Laypeople blamed them: “These are rental agents of clothes, not renunciates.” The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. … They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to bring women’s ornamented dresses when going forth. One should make the candidate relinquish them, and then give the going forth. ‘Relinquishing’ means if a woman comes and wants to go forth, she should be made to relinquish lay people’s items for decorating the body. If she thinks: “At a certain time, there will be a famine, and almsfood will be hard to get, or at the time of old age and sickness, I’ll need liquid remedies and medicines. Women only rarely can obtain these things,” she should place them in someone’s house. If a woman comes with her worldly ornamented dresses, if a bhikkhunī gives her the going forth while she has them, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on bringing ornamented dresses when going forth.




MgPn7


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時釋種女摩羅女梨車女貴人女。將使人出家。使人端正。令與外人交通以自活命。為世人所譏。此非出家人。是婬女耳。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。乃至答言實爾。佛言。汝云何畜。婬女以自活命。從今日後。不聽畜婬女活命。若畜者越比尼罪。是名婬女。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, women from the Sakyan, Mallan, and Licchavi clans, as well as from aristocratic families went forth with servants. The servants were graceful, so they made them associate with men from outside, to make a living. Laypeople blamed them: “These aren’t renunciates, they’re just prostitutes.” The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. … They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “Why did you keep prostitutes to make a living? From now on, it’s no longer allowed to keep prostitutes for a living. If a bhikkhunī keeps one, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on prostitutes.




MgPn8


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時世尊制戒。不聽畜婬女。爾時比丘尼便私畜園民女。於外婬蕩以自活命。為世人所譏。此非出家法。是婬女耳。比丘尼以是因緣往白世尊。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽私畜園民女。使人女作婬女以自活命。若畜者越比尼罪。是名園民女。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the World-honored One had laid down the precept that it’s not allowed to keep prostitutes. Then bhikkhunīs kept personal female attendants who engaged in sex outside to make a living. Laypeople blamed them: “These aren’t renunciates, they’re just prostitutes.” The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. … They answered: “We really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to keep personal attendants, or to make servant women prostitute themselves to make a living. If (a bhikkhunī) keeps one, she breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on female attendants.




MgPn9


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時有年少比丘尼。端正乳出。人見皆笑。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白佛。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。當作僧祇支。作法者如上說。應先著覆乳衣然後著餘衣。若不畜僧祇支越比尼罪。有而不著亦越比尼罪。是名僧祇支法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a young bhikkhunī who was graceful. Her breasts were exposed, and when people saw it, they all laughed at her. The bhikkhunīs for this reason went and informed the World-honored One. … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, you should make a vest. The method to make it’s as explained above. She should first put on a breast covering cloth, and over that wear her other robes. If she doesn’t keep a vest, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she has one, but doesn’t wear it, she also breaks a minor vinaya rule.” This is called the rule on vests.




MgPn10


<beginchinese>佛住毘舍離。如跋陀羅比丘尼緣中廣說。佛言。不聽裸身浴。當用浴衣。不聽裸形入河若池水中浴。當著雨衣。若裸浴越比尼罪。若避隱處無人處裸浴無罪。是名浴衣法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Vesālī. To be explained in detail as in the rule about Bhaddā bhikkhunī. The Buddha said: “It’s not allowed to bathe naked. She should use a bathing robe. It’s not allowed to enter a river or a pond naked to bathe. She should wear the rains robe. If she bathes naked, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. If she bathes naked in an avoided, hidden place or a place without people, there is no offense. This is called the rule on the bathing robe.”




Summary Verse


<beginchinese>坐法并竹席 纏腰覆襏衣
著俗嚴飾具 合嚴飾具度
使人園民女 僧祇支浴衣
雜跋渠初竟<endchinese>

The method of sitting, bamboo mats, binding around the hips, lingerie,
Wearing worldly ornaments, bringing ornamented dresses when going forth,
Servants, female attendants, the vest, the bathing robe,
The first chapter is finished.