MgPn31


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時有大臣犯王法。其家財物盡應沒官。王即遣人守護。時偷蘭難陀比丘尼乞食次到其家。婦人語言。阿梨耶。我家有事犯王罪應至死。財物入官。我欲寄少寶物嚴飾之具。若我得脫當相顧直。我若死者即持相施。時比丘尼即與鉢盛雜寶。覆已而去。時守門人見之問言。鉢中何物而不示之。又復叱喚畏而示之。比丘尼聞已往白。乃至答言實爾。佛言。從今日後。不聽覆鉢寶物。若有犯官事未被收錄。又未籍其財。爾時寄者得取。若王收攝又籍其財。應語言。世尊制戒不得受是。若言我與塔與僧施汝得取。得已不得覆上而去。當露持去。若有問者當言。塔物僧物我物。若聽去者善。若不聽者當還。是名覆鉢法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a high official who had broken the king’s law. His house and all his wealth were to be confiscated by the authorities, and the king had sent men to guard (the place). Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī reached that house on her continuous almsround. The woman said: “Venerable, there’s a problem in my family. We have broken the king’s law, and will be put to death. Our wealth will be taken by the authorities. I want to entrust a few valuables and ornaments to you. If I’m released, I’ll take them back from you at once. If I die, then take them as an offering.” The bhikkhunī then filled her bowl with various valuables, covered it, and left. When the guards at the door saw her, they asked: “What’s in your bowl?,” but she didn’t show them. They again shouted at her. She got fearful and showed it. When the bhikkhunīs heard this, they went and informed … She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to hide valuables in a bowl. If there is an official who has broken the law, and an inventory hasn’t yet been made, and his wealth hasn’t yet been taken stock of, if at such a time (a bhikkhunī) is entrusted, she may take it. If the king has made an inventory, and taken stock of his wealth, she should say: “The World-honored One has laid down a precept that one may not accept this.” If they say: “We give it to a stupa, or to the sangha, or we offer it to you,” she may take it. When she has obtained it, she may not cover it up and go. She should go carrying it openly. If someone asks, she should say: “These are items for a stupa, or the sangha’s items, or my items.” If she’s allowed to go, it’s good. If she’s not allowed, she should return them. This is called the rule on covering the bowl.




MgPn32


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼作廁。以物覆上。諸女人持死胎放中。後有賤人旃陀羅抒廁。見已言。是沙門尼自墮胎擲中。諸比丘尼以是因緣往白。乃至佛言。從今日後不聽覆廁。當開口作。若閉口作者越比尼罪。是名廁法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs built a toilet with a cover. Women brought dead fetuses, and put them inside. Later, outcasts, caṇḍālas, dug out the toilet. When they saw (the fetuses), they said: “These renunciates had abortions, and threw them in.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs went and informed … The Buddha said: “From now on, a covered toilet is no longer allowed. You should build it with an open toilet bowl. If (a bhikkhunī) builds it with a cover, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is called the rule on toilets.




MgPn33


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時釋種女摩羅女於浴室中浴。時有年少入中壞其梵行。諸比丘尼語大愛道。乃至從今日後不聽入浴室。若病者得房內然火油塗而揩。若比丘尼入浴室浴者。越比尼罪。是名浴室法。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, women from Sakyan and Mallan families bathed in bathrooms. Then young men entered there, and raped them. The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī … “From now on, it’s no longer allowed to enter a bathroom. If (a bhikkhunī) is sick, she may light a fire in a room, apply oil, and have a massage. If a bhikkhunī enters a bathroom to bathe, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is called the rule on bathrooms.




MgPn34


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時未制戒。比丘尼阿練若處聚落中未有住處。時五百比丘尼。大愛道為上首。於王園中住。諸釋種女摩羅女年少端正。有諸年少初夜伺便欲捉比丘尼。見已乘空而去。中夜復來亦復如是。後夜復來。中有鈍根。不時入定及睡眠者。不得即去。為所侵掠。大愛道以是事往白世尊。佛言。從今日後。不聽比丘尼在阿練若處住。若四眾集竟夜說法者得住。爾時不得在屏處。若比丘尼阿練若處住者越比尼罪。是名阿練若處。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the precept about bhikkhunīs and the wilderness hadn’t yet been laid down. There were no residences in villages yet. Then 500 bhikkhunīs with Mahāpajāpatī as their leader were staying in the king’s park. The women from Sakyan and Mallan families were young and graceful. Young men waited for them at the beginning of the night, and wanted to get hold of the bhikkhunīs. Having seen them, the bhikkhunīs rose up in the air and left. In the middle of the night, they came back again, and (the bhikkhunīs) did the same again. At the end of the night, they came again. Among (the bhikkhunīs) were some with dull faculties, who hadn’t entered concentration in time, and were sleeping. So they then didn’t manage to leave, and were seized by force. Mahāpajāpatī went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “From now on, it’s no longer allowed for a bhikkhunī to stay in the wilderness. If the four assemblies gather throughout the night to hear the dhamma, she may stay. At that time, she may not be in a secluded place. If a bhikkhunī stays in the wilderness, she breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is called the rule on the wilderness.




MgPn35


<beginchinese>比丘受迦絺那衣非比丘尼。比丘尼受迦絺那衣非比丘。比丘捨非比丘尼。比丘尼捨非比丘。
比丘阿提呵魯阿那提訶魯非比丘尼。比丘尼阿提訶魯阿那提訶魯非比丘。<endchinese>

When bhikkhus receive a kaṭhina robe, the act isn’t valid for the bhikkhunīs. When bhikkhunīs receive a kaṭhina robe, the act isn’t valid for the bhikkhus. When bhikkhus relinquish it, the act isn’t valid for the bhikkhunīs. When bhikkhunīs relinquish it, the act isn’t valid for the bhikkhus. 
The bhikkhus’ offerings and non-offerings<note: The Chinese text transliterates “abhihāra-anabhihāra”. It seems that this is a misunderstanding of the Indic text from which it was translated. The Lokuttaravāda parallel says: “yo bhikṣūṇām abhihāro an-abhihāro so bhikṣuṇīnāṁ” (An offering to the bhikkhus isn’t an offering to the bhikkhunīs.) “An-abhihāro” therefore isn’t a thing, and should have been translated as “isn’t an offering” instead of transliterating it.> are not for the bhikkhunīs. The bhikkhunīs’ offerings and non-offerings are not for the bhikkhus.




Summary Verse


<beginchinese>覆鉢并寶鉢 開廁入浴室
阿練若處住 比丘受迦絺
非是比丘尼 比丘捨迦絺
非是比丘尼 第四跋渠竟<endchinese>

Covering the bowl, valuables in the bowl, an open toilet, entering a bathroom,
Living in the wilderness, bhikkhus receiving kaṭhina,
not valid for bhikkhunīs, bhikkhus relinquishing kaṭhina,
not valid for bhikkhunīs, the fourth chapter is finished.




MgPn36


<beginchinese>食於比丘不淨比丘尼淨。比丘尼不淨比丘淨。比丘得使比丘尼授食。除金銀及錢五生種火淨。比丘尼得從比丘受食。除金銀及錢火淨五生種。<endchinese>

Food that is impure for bhikkhus may be pure for bhikkhunīs. Food that is impure for bhikkhunīs may be pure for bhikkhus. A bhikkhu may have a bhikkhunī offer food, but not gold, silver, money, and the five kinds of purifications of living seeds by fire (etc.). <note: Fruits have to be made allowable for consumption by monastics through a procedure that symbolically damages the seeds. This can be done with five methods, one of them being with fire.> A bhikkhunī may accept food from a bhikkhu, but not gold, silver, money, and the five kinds of purifications of living seeds by fire (etc.).




MgPn37


<beginchinese>有三因緣非比丘。何等三。心決定捨戒。有實事僧驅出。形轉為女。是名三非比丘。應遣詣比丘尼精舍。不得共比丘尼同覆障應別。若後還得男根者。當還比丘僧中。故名具足。亦復本歲<endchinese>

There are three reasons for which someone is no longer a bhikkhu. Which three? He decides to give up the training, there are valid reasons for the sangha to expel him, or he turns into a woman. These are called the three reasons for which someone is no longer a bhikkhu. (If she has turned into a woman,) she should be sent to a bhikkhunī monastery. She may not be in a concealed place together with the bhikkhunīs, and should stay apart. If she later turns back and acquires male genitals, he should return to the bhikkhu sangha. He’s still called fully ordained, and also keeps his previous seniority.




MgPn38


<beginchinese>有三因緣非比丘尼。何等三。心決定壞威儀。有實事僧驅出。轉形為男。如比丘中說。<endchinese>

There are three reasons for which someone is no longer a bhikkhunī. Which three? She decides to break proper conduct<note: i.e. puts on lay clothes, see pakiṇṇaka rule 29>, there are valid reasons for the sangha to expel her, or she turns into a man. To be explained as for the bhikkhus.




MgPn39


<beginchinese>比丘尼無有作殘食法。一坐足自恣食。<endchinese>

Bhikkhunīs don’t have the procedure to designate food as leftovers. They eat in one sitting until they have had enough when they’re invited.




MgPn40


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城阿耆羅河彼岸。請二部僧食。比丘比丘尼俱欲渡。比丘言。世尊制戒。不得共船載。比丘二人三人輕船而渡。渡盡比丘尼渡。渡已問歲數。日時已過。時大愛道失食飢羸。到世尊所頭面作禮却住一面。佛知而故問。何故飢色。即以是事具白世尊。佛言。從今日後。上座八人。當次第如法。餘者隨到而坐。若五年大會多人集。比丘尼上座八人當次第坐。餘者隨意坐。若八人不隨次第坐。越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. Both sanghas had been invited for a meal on the far shore of the river Aciravatī, and the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs all wanted to cross over. The bhikkhus said: “The World-honored One has laid down the precept that we may not board a boat together.” The bhikkhus boarded in groups of two and three to keep the boat light, and crossed over. When they had all crossed, the bhikkhunīs crossed over. When they had crossed, they asked each other for their seniority. The time passed, so Mahāpajāpatī missed her meal, and was hungry and weak. She went to the World-honored One, paid respect, and stood at one side. The Buddha knew about this, and intentionally asked her: “Why are you hungry?” Then she fully informed the World-honored One about this matter. The Buddha said: “From now on, the eight most senior persons should sit in order of seniority according to dhamma. The others should sit as they arrive. If many people gather for the great festival every five years, the eight most senior bhikkhunīs should sit in order of seniority. The others should sit as they like. If the eight persons don’t sit in order of seniority, they break a minor vinaya rule.” This is what the World-honored One said.




Summary Verse


<beginchinese>二眾淨不同 三非比丘僧
三非比丘尼 無殘八上座
第五跋渠竟<endchinese>

For the two sanghas purity isn’t the same, three reasons for not being a bhikkhu,
Three reasons for not being a bhikkhunī, no leftovers, the eight seniors,
The fifth chapter is finished.




Conclusion


<beginchinese>比丘雜跋渠中。別住蒜傘蓋。乘刀治革屣同床臥坐伎樂九事應出不說。餘十三跋渠殘比丘尼別。五雜跋渠威儀中。阿練若浴室廁屋縫衣簟應出不說。餘盡同比丘尼。二部修多羅及學五百戒。世尊分別說戒序。八波羅夷。十九僧伽婆尸沙。三十尼薩耆波夜提。百四十一波夜提。八波羅提提舍尼。六十四眾學。七止諍法。法隨順法偈在後。比丘尼比尼竟。<endchinese>

From the bhikkhus’ collection of miscellaneous rules (pakiṇṇaka), the nine rules on living apart, garlic, umbrellas, vehicles, wielding a knife, leather sandals, sleeping together on one bed, sitting together on one bed, and dancing and music, should be removed and not recited. The remaining of the other 13 chapters are different from the bhikkhunīs’ rules.<note: It’s not clear to me how it should make sense to remove nine rules, and then not share any of the rest. When comparing it with the Lokuttaravāda parallel, it seems obvious that this text is corrupted. The Lo gives instructions to remove the nine rules as above from various places in the bhikkhu pakiṇṇaka, and to replace them with other nine rules from the 12th chapter of the bhikkhu pakiṇṇaka. The 12th chapter is thus completely broken up, and integrated in the other chapters. Therefore, of the original 14 chapters, 13 remain, which are all shared between bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs.>
Five rules from the Abhisamācārika should be removed and not recited: wilderness, bathrooms, toilets, sewing robes, and bamboo mats. The remaining are all shared with the bhikkhunīs. 
These are the pātimokkhas for the two sanghas and the 500 training precepts that the World-honored One has revealed: the introduction, the eight eight pārājika rules, the 19 saṅghādisesa rules, the 30 nissaggiya pācittiya rules, the 141 pācittiya rules, the eight pātidesanīya rules, the 64 training rules (sekhiyas), the seven rules to settle disputes, the dhammas and anudhammas, and lastly the verses. End of the bhikkhunī vinaya.
