SarvDm

<note>http://cbetaonline.dila.edu.tw/en/T1435_040</note>
<note>Numbering added to facilitate references to parallels.</note>

<lzh>次明比丘尼法。</lzh>
Below, the bhikkhunī rules are explained.

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時長老優波離問佛言：「世尊！摩訶波闍波提瞿曇彌，受八重法故，即是出家受具足戒，成比丘尼法；餘比丘尼當云何？」佛言：「應現前白四羯磨。」</lzh>
(SarvDm01) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the venerable Upāli asked the Buddha: “World-honored One, when Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī accepted the eight rules of respect, that was her going forth and full ordination, and she attained the status of a bhikkhunī. How should the other bhikkhunīs do that?” The Buddha said: “They should take part in a formal act with a motion as fourth.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時諸比丘與比丘尼作羯磨，諸比丘尼心不喜。是事白佛，佛言：「從今諸比丘，不應與比丘尼作羯磨。比丘尼還比丘尼作羯磨，除受具足戒羯磨、摩那埵羯磨、出罪羯磨。」</lzh>
(SarvDm02) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhus carried out formal acts for the bhikkhunīs, and the bhikkhunīs were unhappy. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, bhikkhus shouldn’t carry out formal acts for the bhikkhunīs. Bhikkhunīs should turn to bhikkhunīs to carry out formal acts, except for the formal acts of full ordination, probation (mānatta) and rehabilitation.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼與比丘作羯磨，諸比丘心不喜。是事白佛，佛言：「諸比丘尼不應與比丘作羯磨，比丘還與比丘作羯磨，除不禮拜、不共語、不供養羯磨。」</lzh>
(SarvDm03) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs carried out formal acts for the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus were unhappy. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “Bhikkhunīs shouldn’t carry out formal acts for the bhikkhus. Bhikkhus should turn to bhikkhus to carry out formal acts, except for the formal act to not pay respect (to a bhikkhu), not talk with him, and not support him.”<note> This is a formal act that only bhikkhunīs can carry out.</note>

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時諸婦人為夫舅姑所苦惱故，出家作比丘尼。爾時為和上尼、阿闍梨尼，共住比丘尼所苦惱故，還作白衣。諸居士呵責言：「是諸不吉弊女輩，我等先是其主，中間作比丘尼受我尊重，今我等還受其尊重，無有決定。」是事白佛，佛言：「若比丘尼一反戒，不復聽出家受具戒。」</lzh>
(SarvDm04) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, because women suffered under their husbands and parents-in-law, they went forth and became bhikkhunīs. Then, because they suffered under their preceptors, teachers, and the bhikkhunīs living with them, they returned to lay life. The householders criticized them: “Those inauspicious, inferior women! We previously were their guardians, then they became bhikkhunīs and received our respect, and now we receive their respect again. They don’t have determination.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “If a bhikkhunī disrobes once, she’s not allowed to go forth and receive the full ordination again.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時長老摩訶迦葉，中前著衣持鉢，從耆闍崛山出入王舍城乞食。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，在大迦葉前趨行。大迦葉言：「妹！汝若疾行、若避我道。」即罵言：「汝本是外道，有何急事而不徐徐行？」大迦葉言：「惡女！我不責汝，我責阿難。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼在比丘前行，若在前行，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm05) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the venerable Mahākassapa, before midday, put on his robes, took his bowl, came down from Vulture’s peak and entered Rājagaha on almsround. Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī walked towards (the space) in front of Mahākassapa, and Mahākassapa said: “Younger sister, either walk quickly or get out of my path.” Then she abused him: “You were formerly a non-Buddhist renunciate. What urgent matter is there, that you won’t walk slowly?” Mahākassapa said: “Evil woman, I didn’t criticize you, I criticized Ānanda.”<note> This seems to refer to the incident at SN 16.11, also mentioned in Chinese parallels and several bhikkhunī khandhakas.</note> They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that a bhikkhunī walks in front of a bhikkhu. If she walks in front of a bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，中前著衣持鉢行乞食。食後以尼師檀著左肩上，入安陀林中大坐一樹下，時有蛇來入女根中。是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼大坐。若大坐，突吉羅。若展一脚坐，不犯。」</lzh>
(SarvDm06) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī, before midday, put on her robes, took her bowl, and went on almsround. After the meal, she put her sitting cloth on her left shoulder, and went into the Andhavana (Dark Wood) to sit “in the great way”<note> In the parallels, this refers to sitting in full lotus position.</note> under a tree. Then a snake came and entered into her vagina. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that a bhikkhunī sits in the great way. If she sits in the great way, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she sits with one foot extended, the offense isn’t committed.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時優波離問佛言：「世尊不聽比丘尼出比丘見聞疑罪；頗有因緣比丘尼出比丘見聞疑罪，不犯罪耶？」佛言：「無也！除語：『莫近惡知識、惡伴黨。』」</lzh>
(SarvDm07) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Upāli asked the Buddha: “The World-honored One hasn’t allowed that bhikkhunīs expose a bhikkhu’s seen, heard, or suspected offenses. Might there be reasons for which a bhikkhunī can expose a bhikkhu’s seen heard, or suspected offenses, without committing an offense?” The Buddha said: “No. Except for telling him: ‘Don’t associate with bad friends and bad companions.’”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有比丘教一比丘反戒，隨得罪；若教比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼令反戒，突吉羅。若比丘尼教比丘尼反戒，突吉羅；若比丘尼教式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼、比丘反戒，突吉羅。若式叉摩尼教式叉摩尼反戒，突吉羅；若教沙彌、沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼反戒，突吉羅。若沙彌教沙彌反戒，突吉羅；若教沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼反戒，突吉羅。若沙彌尼教沙彌尼反戒，突吉羅；若教比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌反戒，突吉羅。</lzh>
(SarvDm08) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhu instructed another bhikkhu to disrobe, and thus incurred an offense. If he instructs a bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī instructs another bhikkhunī to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī instructs a sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, or bhikkhu to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sikkhamānā instructs another sikkhāmānā to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she instructs a sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, or bhikkhunī to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇera instructs another sāmaṇera to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he instructs a sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, or sikkhamānā to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇerī instructs another sāmaṇerī to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she instructs a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, or sāmaṇera to disrobe, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>若比丘，以種種物誘餘比丘，得罪；若誘比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。若比丘尼以種種物誘比丘尼，犯罪；若誘式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼比丘，突吉羅。若式叉摩尼以種種物誘式叉摩尼，突吉羅；若誘沙彌、沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼，突吉羅。若沙彌以種種物誘沙彌，突吉羅；若誘沙彌尼比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼，突吉羅。若沙彌尼以種種物誘沙彌尼，突吉羅；若誘比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌，突吉羅。</lzh>
(SarvDm09) If a bhikkhu entices another bhikkhu with all kinds of things, he incurs an offense. If he entices a bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī entices another bhikkhunī with all kinds of things, she commits an offense. If she entices a sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, or bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sikkhamānā entices another sikkhāmānā with all kinds of things, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she entices a sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, or bhikkhunī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇera entices another sāmaṇera with all kinds of things, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he entices a sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, or sikkhamānā, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇerī entices another sāmaṇerī with all kinds of things, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she entices a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, or sāmaṇera, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>若比丘向餘比丘喑嗌，突吉羅；若向比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼喑嗌，突吉羅。若比丘尼向比丘尼喑嗌，突吉羅；若向式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼喑嗌，突吉羅；若比丘尼向比丘喑嗌，波逸提。若式叉摩尼向式叉摩尼喑嗌，突吉羅；若向比丘、比丘尼、沙彌、沙彌尼喑嗌，突吉羅。若沙彌向沙彌喑嗌，突吉羅；若向比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌尼喑嗌，突吉羅。若沙彌尼向沙彌尼喑嗌，突吉羅；若向比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌喑嗌，突吉羅。</lzh>
(SarvDm10) If a bhikkhu grunts at another bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he grunts at a bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī grunts at another bhikkhunī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she grunts at a sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī grunts at a bhikkhu, it’s a pācittiya. If a sikkhamānā grunts at another sikkhāmānā, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she grunts at a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇera grunts at another sāmaṇera, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he grunts at a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇerī grunts at another sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she grunts at a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, or sāmaṇera, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>若比丘，輕比丘，突吉羅。若比丘，輕比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。若比丘尼，輕比丘尼，突吉羅。若比丘尼，輕式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。若式叉摩尼，輕式叉摩尼，突吉羅；若輕沙彌、沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼，突吉羅。若沙彌，輕沙彌，突吉羅；若輕沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼，皆突吉羅。若沙彌尼，輕沙彌尼，突吉羅；若輕比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌，皆突吉羅。</lzh>
(SarvDm11) If a bhikkhu slights another bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he slights a bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī slights another bhikkhunī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī slights a sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa.<note> “Bhikkhu” is missing from the list.</note> If a sikkhamānā slights another sikkhāmānā, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she slights a sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, or bhikkhunī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sāmaṇera slights another sāmaṇera, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he slights a sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, or sikkhamānā, all are dukkaṭas. If a sāmaṇerī slights another sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she slights a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, or sāmaṇera, all are dukkaṭas.

<lzh>若比丘，惡語向餘比丘，犯罪；若惡語向比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼，突吉羅。若比丘尼，惡語向比丘尼，犯罪；若惡語向式叉摩尼、沙彌、沙彌尼、比丘，突吉羅。若式叉摩尼，惡語向式叉摩尼，突吉羅；若向沙彌、沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼，皆突吉羅。若沙彌，惡語向沙彌，突吉羅；若向沙彌尼、比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼惡語，突吉羅。若沙彌尼，向沙彌尼，突吉羅；若向比丘、比丘尼、式叉摩尼、沙彌，突吉羅。</lzh>
(SarvDm12) If a bhikkhu speaks in an unwholesome way with another bhikkhu, he commits an offense. If he speaks in an unwholesome way with a bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, or sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a bhikkhunī speaks in an unwholesome way with another bhikkhunī, she commits an offense. If she speaks in an unwholesome way with a sikkhamānā, sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, or bhikkhu, it’s a dukkaṭa. If a sikkhamānā speaks in an unwholesome way with another sikkhāmānā, it’s a dukkaṭa. If she speaks in an unwholesome way with a sāmaṇera, sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, or bhikkhunī, all are dukkaṭas. If a sāmaṇera speaks in an unwholesome way with another sāmaṇera, it’s a dukkaṭa. If he speaks in an unwholesome way with a sāmaṇerī, bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, or sikkhamānā, it’s a dukkaṭa. If it’s a sāmaṇerī with another sāmaṇerī, it’s a dukkaṭa. If it’s with a bhikkhu, bhikkhunī, sikkhamānā, or sāmaṇera, it’s a dukkaṭa.

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼到祇洹聽法，諸比丘敷敷具竟，多有殘在。諸比丘尼求敷具故苦惱，語比丘言：「大德已敷敷具，餘者借我等坐。」諸比丘言：「佛未聽我等敷敷具竟，殘與比丘尼。」諸比丘不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今聽諸比丘敷敷具竟，殘與比丘尼坐。」 </lzh>
(SarvDm13) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs went to Jeta’s grove to listen to the dhamma. The bhikkhus had laid out seats, and many were still left. Because the bhikkhunīs were suffering after searching for seats, they said to the bhikkhus: “The venerables have already laid out seats, lend us the remaining ones to sit.” The bhikkhus said: “The Buddha hasn’t allowed us yet, when we’ve laid out seats, to give the remaining ones to bhikkhunīs.” The bhikkhus didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, I allow that when the bhikkhus have laid out seats, to give the remaining ones to the bhikkhunīs to sit.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時長老大迦葉，中前著衣持鉢，從耆闍崛山入王舍城乞食。偷蘭難陀比丘尼隨後來至，以肘隱大迦葉背。大迦葉言：「惡女！我不責汝，我責阿難。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼隱比丘背。若隱者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm14) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the venerable Mahākassapa, before midday, put on his robes, took his bowl, came down from Vulture’s peak and entered Rājagaha on almsround. Thullanandā bhikkhunī followed behind him, and leaned her elbows against Mahākassapa’s back. Mahākassapa said: “Evil woman, I didn’t criticize you, I criticized Ānanda.”<note> This seems to refer to the incident at SN 16.11, also mentioned in Chinese parallels and several bhikkhunī khandhakas.</note> They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that a bhikkhunī leans against a bhikkhu’s back. If she leans, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時助提婆達多比丘尼，著雜綵裲襠，諸居士呵責言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有德。』著雜綵服，如王夫人、大臣婦。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘尼不應著雜綵服。若著，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm15) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta wore multicolored undergarments. The householders ciriticzed them: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but they wear multicolored clothes, like queens and wives of high officials.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t wear multicolored clothes. If she wears them, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時諸比丘尼，以雜色繩、猪腸帶、雜綵綖繫身。是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼以雜色繩、猪腸帶、雜綵綖繫身。若繫者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm16) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs tied multi-colored strings, belts of pigs’ intestines, and multi-colored threads around their bodies. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that a bhikkhunī ties multi-colored strings, belts of pigs’ intestines, and multi-colored threads around her body. If she ties them, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時助提婆達多比丘尼，著細襵衣、著毦衣、著生起衣、著細踈衣。是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼著四種衣。若著，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm17) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta wore finely pleated robes, robes with feathers, robes that were rising up, and very thin robes. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that a bhikkhunī wears these four kinds of robes. If she wears them, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼故嚬呻，諸比丘尼問言：「汝作何等」？答言：「受觸樂。」是事白佛，佛言：「比丘尼不應嚬呻。若故嚬呻，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm18) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī intentionally made concealed groans. The bhikkhunīs asked: “What are you doing?” She answered: “I’m feeling a pleasurable contact.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “A bhikkhunīs shouldn’t make concealed groans. If she intentionally makes concealed groans, it’s a dukkaṭa.” 

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。有異比丘乞食，一時乞兩分：先乞者自食，後乞者還房與比丘尼。此比丘乞二分食，時天雨故，比丘尼不來，無人食此分，棄著僧坊內，眾鳥來集作大音聲。佛食後將阿難往至其所，佛見已知而故問阿難：「此中何以眾鳥來集作大音聲？」阿難白佛言：「世尊！有異比丘乞二分食：前乞者自食，後分與比丘尼。乞兩分食，時天雨故，比丘尼不來，無人食此分，棄著僧坊中。以是因緣故，眾鳥大集作大音聲。」佛知故問阿難：「諸比丘與非親里比丘尼食耶？」阿難答言：「世尊！與。」佛以是因緣集比丘僧，集僧已種種因緣呵責諸比丘：「云何名比丘，與非親里比丘尼食。」佛告諸比丘：「從今比丘不應與非親里比丘尼食。與者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm19) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. There was a certain bhikkhu on almsround who at the same time asked for two portions: First for himself to eat, and then to give to a bhikkhunī after returning to the monastery. When the bhikkhu had asked for two portions of food, the bhikkhunī didn’t come, because it was raining. There was nobody to eat this portion, so he threw it away inside the monastery. A flock of birds gathered and made a lot of noise. After the meal, the Buddha took Ānanda to that place. When the Buddha saw it, he knew, and intentionally asked Ānanda: “Why has that flock of birds gathered here and is making a lot of noise?” Ānanda told the Buddha: “World-honored One, a certain bhikkhu asked for two portions of food: First for himself to eat, and the other portion to give to a bhikkhunī. When the bhikkhu had asked for two portions of food, the bhikkhunī didn’t come, because it was raining. There was nobody to eat this portion, so he threw it away inside the monastery. For this reason, a flock of birds gathered and is making a lot of noise.” The Buddha knew, and intentionally asked Ānanda: “Do the bhikkhus give food to an unrelated bhikkhunī?” Ānanda answered: “World-honored One, yes, they do.” Because of this matter, the Buddha gathered the bhikkhu sangha. Having gathered the sangha, he criticized the bhikkhus with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called a bhikkhu when you give food to an unrelated bhikkhunī?” The Buddha said to the bhikkhus: “From now on, a bhikkhu shouldn’t give food to an unrelated bhikkhunī. If he gives it, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。時世飢儉乞食難得，諸比丘節日得食，多有餘殘。諸比丘尼求食不得生苦惱，語諸比丘言：「汝等與我殘食。」諸比丘言：「佛未聽我等與諸比丘尼殘食。」是事白佛，佛言：「如是飢儉時，聽與比丘尼殘食。」飢儉世過至豐樂時，諸比丘如飢餓時與比丘尼殘食，諸比丘尼不受，作是言：「汝等殘宿，於我亦殘宿。汝等不淨，於我亦不淨。」諸比丘不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘殘宿、比丘尼淨，比丘尼殘宿、比丘淨。」</lzh>
(SarvDm20) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. Then there was a famine in the world and food was hard to obtain on almsround. The bhikkhus obtained food on a holiday, and had many leftovers. The bhikkhunīs searched for food, but didn’t obtain any, and were suffering. They said to the bhikkhus: “Give us the leftovers.” The bhikkhus said: “The Buddha hasn’t allowed that we give leftovers to the bhikkhunīs yet.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “In a time of famine such as this one, I allow to give leftovers to the bhikkhunīs.” When the famine in the world had passed and a time of abundance came, the bhikkhus gave leftovers to the bhikkhunīs as during the famine. The bhikkhunīs didn’t accept them and said: “Your leftovers were kept overnight, and for us they’re also leftovers kept overnight. They’re impure for you, and also impure for us.” The bhikkhus didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, the bhikkhus’ leftovers that were kept overnight are pure for the bhikkhunīs, and the bhikkhunīs’ leftovers that were kept overnight are pure for the bhikkhus.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。諸比丘問比丘尼遮道法，諸比丘尼羞不喜。是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘問比丘尼遮道法，比丘尼應問比丘尼遮道法。」</lzh>
(SarvDm21) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. The bhikkhus asked the bhikkhunīs about the states that obstruct the path, and the bhikkhunīs were ashamed and unhappy. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that bhikkhus ask bhikkhunīs about the states that obstruct the path. Bhikkhunīs should ask bhikkhunīs about the states that obstruct the path.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，問比丘遮道法，比丘羞不喜。是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼問比丘遮道法，比丘應問比丘遮道法。」</lzh>
(SarvDm22) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs asked the bhikkhus about the states that obstruct the path, and the bhikkhus were ashamed and unhappy. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that bhikkhunīs ask bhikkhus about the states that obstruct the path. Bhikkhus should ask bhikkhus about the states that obstruct the path.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，與不能正語式叉摩尼受具戒。是式叉摩尼白佛言：「度我。」語不正故，便言：「塗我。」諸年少比丘尼笑之，是式叉摩尼羞故起去。以是事故，遂不復受具戒。是事白佛，佛言：「從今有語不正式叉摩尼，餘比丘尼應代乞。代乞法者，一心和合比丘尼僧，代乞比丘尼應從坐起，偏袒右肩、胡跪合掌，作是言：『大德僧聽！是某甲式叉摩尼語不正，從僧乞受具戒，和上尼某甲。僧當濟度與某甲式叉摩尼受具足戒，憐愍故！』第二亦應言：『大德僧聽！是某甲式叉摩尼語不正，從僧乞受具足戒，和上尼某甲。僧當濟度與某甲式叉摩尼受具足戒，和上尼某甲，憐愍故！』第三亦應言：『大德僧聽！是某甲式叉摩尼語不正，從僧乞受具足戒，和上尼某甲。僧當濟度與某甲式叉摩尼受具足戒，憐愍故！』」</lzh>
(SarvDm23) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs gave the full ordination to a sikkhamānā who couldn’t speak properly. The sikkhamānā said to the Buddha: “Ordain me.” But because of her improper speech, she actually said: “Rub me.” The young bhikkhunīs laughed, and because that sikkhamānā was ashamed, she got up and left. Because of this incident, she subsequently didn’t receive the full ordination. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, when there’s a sikkhamānā whose speech is improper, the other bhikkhunīs should ask on her behalf. The procedure for asking on her behalf is: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

When the bhikkhunī sangha is unanimous and harmonious, the bhikkhunī asking on her behalf should get up from her seat, uncover her right shoulder, kneel down, join her palms, and say: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This sikkhamānā So-and-so, whose speech is improper, asks the sangha for the full ordination, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha should let her cross over and give sikkhamānā So-and-so the full ordination, out of compassion.’ A second time she should say: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This sikkhamānā So-and-so, whose speech is improper, asks the sangha for the full ordination, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha should let her cross over and give sikkhamānā So-and-so the full ordination, with So-and-so as her preceptor, out of compassion.’ A third time she should say: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This sikkhamānā So-and-so, whose speech is improper, asks the sangha for the full ordination, with So-and-so as her preceptor. The sangha should let her cross over and give sikkhamānā So-and-so the full ordination, out of compassion.’”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時長老摩訶迦葉，雨時中前著衣持鉢，入王舍城乞食。偷蘭難陀比丘尼，隨後來至嗅大迦葉。大迦葉言：「妹！若在前行，莫嗅我。」比丘尼言：「大德先去。」復嗅不已。大迦葉言：「惡女！我不責汝，我責阿難。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽比丘尼嗅比丘。若嗅，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm24) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, when it was raining and before midday, the venerable Mahākassapa, put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered Rājagaha on almsround. Thullanandā bhikkhunī followed behind him and took a sniff of Mahākassapa. Mahākassapa said: “Younger sister, walk in front of me. Don’t sniff me.” The bhikkhunī said: “The venerable should go first.” And she sniffed him again and again. Mahākassapa said: “Evil woman, I didn’t criticize you, I criticized Ānanda.”<note> This seems to refer to the incident at SN 16.11, also mentioned in Chinese parallels and several bhikkhunī khandhakas.</note> They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that a bhikkhunī sniffs a bhikkhu. If she sniffs, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時城中有一估客婦，夫行不在，與他男子私通，腹漸漸大。是婦怖畏夫故，即自墮胎，作是念：「無同心人持死兒去者。」愁守是兒。有一比丘尼常出入是家，中前著衣持鉢到是家，見婦愁憂，問言：「何故？」答言：「我夫不在，與他私通有娠。畏夫瞋故，即自墮胎，無同心人與我棄者。汝能與我持去不？」答言：「我能。若我持去，誰有知者？」即以死兒著一瓫中，一瓫蓋上持去棄屏處。時有年少戲笑人，見比丘尼棄瓫，共相謂言：「是所棄瓫中有何物？」即便往看。見死小兒，作是言：「諸沙門釋子作婬欲，令比丘尼生兒殺棄。」一人語二人，二人語三人，如是展轉惡名流布，滿舍衛城。有諸比丘少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘尼，不應為他棄死胎。若棄，犯罪。」</lzh>
(SarvDm25) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a merchant’s wife in the city. Her husband had gone away and wasn’t around, and she had an affair with another man. Her belly slowly grew. Because this woman was afraid of her husband, she had an abortion, and thought: “There’s no accomplice to take away the dead baby.” And worried, she kept this baby. There was a bhikkhunī who often went in and out of this house. Before midday, she put on her robes, took her bowl, and went to this house. She saw the worried woman and asked why. She answered: “My husband isn’t around. I had an affair with someone else and got pregnant. Because I was afraid of my husband’s anger, I had an abortion. But there’s no accomplice to throw (the baby) away for me. Can you take it away for me?” She answered: “I can. If I take it away, who would find out?” Then she placed the dead baby into a storage container, covered it with another storage container, took it away, and threw it away in a secluded place. Then there were some young people out for fun, who saw the bhikkhunī throw away a storage container, and they said to each other: “What was in the storage container she threw away?” They then went and had a look. They saw a small dead baby and said: “These renunciates who are Sakyan children engage in sexual intercourse, and when the bhikkhunīs give birth, they kill the baby and throw it away.” One person told two people, two people told three, and in this way, a bad reputation gradually spread through all of Sāvatthī. There were bhikkhus, who were of few wishes, knew moderation, and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t throw away someone else’s dead fetus. If she throws it away, she commits an offense.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時崛多生男兒，作是念：「佛結戒，不聽觸男子。我生男兒，不知云何？」是事白佛，佛言：「從今聽母自觸小兒，乃至未能離母，餘比丘尼不應觸。若觸者犯罪。若能離母，母觸者突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm26) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Guttā gave birth to a baby boy,<note> Cf. pc 176.</note> and thought: “The Buddha has laid down a precept that it’s not allowed to touch a man. I’ve given birth to a baby boy and don’t know what to do.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed that a mother touches her own small child, as long as it can’t be away from the mother yet. The other bhikkhunīs shouldn’t touch him. If they touch him, they commit an offense. If he can be away from the mother, and the mother touches him, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時崛多生男兒，作是念：「佛結戒，乃至一夜不應共男子宿。我生此兒，今當云何？」是事白佛，佛言：「從今聽乃至未能離乳得共宿，若能離乳共宿者，母得突吉羅。餘比丘尼共宿，波逸提。」</lzh>
(SarvDm27) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Guttā gave birth to a baby boy, and thought: “The Buddha has laid down a precept that one shouldn’t spend even one night with a man. I’ve given birth to this baby, so what should I do now?” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed that they spend the night together, as long as (the baby) isn’t weaned yet. If he can be weaned, and they spend the night together, the mother incurs a dukkaṭa. If the other bhikkhunīs spend the night with him, it’s a pācittiya.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時崛多生男兒，作是念：「佛說比丘尼不得獨房宿乃至一夜，須一比丘尼共房宿。我今云何？」是事白佛，佛以是事集僧，語諸比丘尼：「汝等與崛多比丘尼作獨房羯磨，若更有如是比丘尼者，亦應與作獨房羯磨。獨房羯磨法者，一心和合僧，崛多比丘尼從坐起，脫革屣、偏袒右肩、右膝著地，作是言：『大德比丘尼僧憶念！我崛多生男兒，從僧乞獨房羯磨。僧與我作獨房羯磨，憐愍故！』第二、第三亦如是乞。是中一比丘尼應僧中唱言：『大德僧聽！是崛多生男兒，從僧乞獨房羯磨。若僧時到僧忍聽，僧與崛多比丘尼作獨房羯磨。是名白。』白二羯磨。『僧與崛多比丘尼作獨房羯磨竟，僧忍，默然故，是事如是持。』」</lzh>
(SarvDm28) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Guttā gave birth to a baby boy, and thought: “The Buddha said that bhikkhunīs may not spend even one night in a room alone, and that they need to spend the night in the same room with another bhikkhunī. What should I do now?” They told the Buddha of this matter. Because of this, the Buddha gathered the sangha, and said to the bhikkhunīs: “You should carry out a formal act of being alone in a room for Guttā bhikkhunī. If there’s such a bhikkhunī again, you should also carry out the formal act of being along in a room. The procedure for the formal act of being alone in a room is: 


<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

When the bhikkhunī sangha is unanimous and harmonious, Guttā bhikkhunī should get up from her seat, remove her shoes, uncover her right shoulder, place her right knee on the ground, and say: ‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. I, Guttā, have given birth to a baby boy, and ask the sangha for the formal act of being alone in a room. May the sangha carry out the formal act of being alone in a room for me, out of compassion.’ She asks like this a second and third time. Then one of the bhikkhunīs should announce in the sangha: ‘Venerables, may the sangha listen. This Guttā has given birth to a baby boy, and asks the sangha for the formal act of being alone in a room. If the right time has come for the sangha, may the sangha approve that the sangha carries out the formal act of being alone in a room for Guttā bhikkhunī. This is the motion.’ (They do a) formal act with a motion as second. ‘The sangha has carried out the formal act of being alone in a room for Guttā bhikkhunī. The sangha accepts this, therefore you’re silent. This matter is remembered thus.’”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘，入出他家共作知識，諸居士婦語比丘言：「汝度我女令作優婆夷。」比丘答言：「我等手不觸女人。云何得度？」諸比丘不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「慈愍心故，應度令作優婆夷。」</lzh>
(SarvDm29) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhus went in and out of people’s houses and became friends with them. The female householders said to them: “Let our daughters cross over and become lay followers.” The bhikkhus answered: “We can’t touch women with our hands. How could we be able to let them cross over?” The bhikkhus didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “Out of compassion, you should let them cross over and become lay followers.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，出入他家共作知識，諸居士言：「度我兒作優婆塞。」比丘尼言：「我等手不觸男兒，云何得度？」是事白佛，佛言：「慈愍心故，應度為優婆塞。」</lzh>
(SarvDm30) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs went in and out of people’s houses and became friends with them. The male householders said: “Let our sons cross over and become lay followers.” The bhikkhunīs said: “We can’t touch men with our hands. How could we be able to let them cross over?” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “Out of compassion, you should let them cross over and become lay followers.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，入出他家共作知識，諸居士婦語比丘尼言：「汝等與我少許弊壞衣，守護小兒故。」比丘尼言：「汝等倒語，汝白衣應供養我等，云何反索？」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「慈愍心故，應與。」</lzh>
(SarvDm31) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs went in and out of people’s houses and became friends with them. The female householders said to the bhikkhunīs: “Give us a small piece of your patchwork robes, to protect our babies.” The bhikkhunīs said: “Your words are inverted. You lay people should support us. How can you ask for things from us?” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “Out of compassion, I allow to give it.”<note> Cf. pc 132.</note>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時多有諸貴釋種女，出家作比丘尼，露胸行乞食。諸居士呵責言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有德。』露胸行乞，如王夫人、大臣婦。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今聽諸比丘尼用覆脇衣覆胸行乞食。」</lzh>
(SarvDm32) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, many noble Sakyan women had gone forth and become bhikkhunīs. They went on almsround with bare chests. The householders criticzed them: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but they go on almsround bare-chested, like queens and wives of high officials.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed that bhikkhunīs use a flank-covering robe to cover their chest while going on almsround.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有比丘尼，獨入樂善園中，值賊剝脫裸形。諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽諸比丘尼入樂善園中，餘一切園中亦不得入。犯者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm33) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, there was a bhikkhunī who entered a pleasure park alone. She encountered criminals, who made her strip naked. The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that bhikkhunīs enter pleasure parks, and all other parks. If someone breaks this rule, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。助提婆達多比丘尼，男子前入池浴。諸居士呵責言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有德。』在男子前浴，如婬女無異。」有比丘尼，少欲知足行頭陀，聞是事心不喜，以是事白佛。佛以是事集僧，集僧已種種因緣呵責言：「云何名比丘尼，男子前浴？從今比丘尼，不應男子前浴。浴者，波逸提。」</lzh>
(SarvDm34) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta entered a pond to bathe in front of men. The householders criticized them: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but they bathe in front of men. There’s no difference to prostitutes.” There were bhikkhunīs, who were of few wishes, knew moderation, and practised the austerities. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they told the Buddha of this matter. Because of this, the Buddha gathered the sangha. Having gathered the sangha, he criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs, when you bathe in front of men? From now on, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t bathe in front of a man. If she bathes, it’s a pācittiya.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時摩訶波闍波提瞿曇彌，深護佛法，以折伏語為諸比丘尼作羯磨：謂苦切羯磨、依止羯磨、驅出羯磨、下意羯磨。諸比丘尼輕慢言：「某是我和上尼、某是我阿闍梨尼，我從某僧中受具足戒。是老弊比丘尼，不知誰是其和上尼、阿闍梨尼？從何僧中受具戒？」瞿曇彌聞是事心不喜，是事白佛。佛以是事集僧，語比丘尼：「汝等莫惱摩訶波闍波提瞿曇彌！瞿曇彌隨受八重法時，即出家得具足戒，成比丘尼。」</lzh>
(SarvDm35) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī sincerely guarded the Buddha’s dhamma. With subdued speech, she carried out formal acts for the bhikkhunīs, namely the formal act for the cutting of suffering (i.e. full ordination), the formal act of dependence, the formal act of expulsion, and the formal act of submission (i.e. reinstatement after expulsion). The bhikkhunīs treated her with contempt: “So-and-so is our preceptor, So-and-so is our teacher, we’ve received the full ordination from such-and-such a sangha. But this old, inferior bhikkhunī doesn’t know who her preceptor is, who her teacher is, and from which sangha she received the full ordination?” When Gotamī heard this, she was unhappy, and told the Buddha of this matter. Because of this, the Buddha gathered the sangha, and said to the bhikkhunīs: “Don’t make trouble for Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī. When Gotamī accepted the eight rules of respect, she went forth, obtained the full ordination, and became a bhikkhunī.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時華色比丘尼，中前著衣持鉢入城乞食。食後以尼師檀著肩上，入安陀林中敷尼師檀，在一樹下半跏趺坐。爾時有婆羅門兒，於比丘尼生貪著心，到比丘尼所言：「共行不淨事來。」華色比丘尼念言：「我若逆者，或強捉我。」語言：「小住！」問言：「何故但當小住？」是比丘尼即以神力，變內身為外身，婆羅門兒瞋言：「為我厭惡。」即以拳打頭，兩目脫出。餘比丘尼即以水器承眼，往詣佛所。佛語諸比丘尼：「當作誠實語，華色比丘尼於佛法中深心信樂，於佛法僧無有淨物於佛法僧而不施者，以此實故，令其兩眼還復如故。」諸比丘尼作是實語已，眼復如故。佛語諸比丘：「從今比丘尼，不得住阿練兒處。若住，得突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm36) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Uppalavaṇṇa bhikkhunī, before midday, put on her robes, took her bowl, and entered the city on almsround. After the meal, she put her sitting cloth on her shoulder, and went into the Andhavana (Dark Wood). She laid out her sitting cloth, and sat in half lotus position under a tree. Then there was the son of a brahmin, in whose mind craving and attachment towards the bhikkhunī had arisen. He went to the bhikkhunī and said: “Let’s have sex together.” Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī thought: “If I oppose him, he might take me by force.” She said to him: “Wait a little.” He asked: “Why should I wait a little?” Then the bhikkhunī, with her psychic powers, turned the inside of her body outside. The son of a brahmin said angrily: “That’s disgusting.” Then he beat her head with his fist, and both her eyes popped out. Another bhikkhunī put her eyes into a water jug, and they went to the Buddha. The Buddha said to the bhikkhunīs: “You should make an asseveration of truth: ‘Uppalavaṇṇā bhikkhunī, being immersed in the Buddha’s dhamma, has profoundly joyous faith in the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha; there’s nothing pure that she doesn’t offer to the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. By this truth, let her two eyes become as before.’” When the bhikkhunīs had carried out this asseveration of truth, her eyes became as before. The Buddha said to the bhikkhus: “From now on, a bhikkhunī may not stay in the wilderness. If she stays there, she incurs a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，依放牧人住，以象聲、馬聲、男女聲、童男童女聲故，妨坐禪誦經。是諸比丘尼，早起著衣持鉢，到親里知識檀越家，諸居士問言：「汝安隱不？」答言：「不安隱！何以故？我等近放牧人住，象聲、馬聲、男女聲、童男童女聲故，妨我等坐禪誦經行道。」諸居士言：「我為汝等作房舍。」比丘尼言：「佛未聽我等住房舍。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今聽諸比丘尼起僧坊。」</lzh>
(SarvDm37) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs were living in dependence upon herders. Because there were the noises of elephants and horses, of men and women, and of small boys and girls, it prevented (the bhikkhunīs) from sitting in meditation, and reciting suttas. Those bhikkhunīs got up early, put on their robes, took their bowls and went to the houses of their relatives, friends, and supporters. The householders asked: “Are you comfortable?” They answered: “We’re not comfortable. Why? We live close to herders, and because of the noises of elephants and horses, of men and women, and of small boys and girls, we’re prevented from sitting in meditation, reciting suttas, and practicing the path.” The householders said: “We’ll build a building for you.” The bhikkhunīs said: “The Buddha hasn’t allowed us to live in a building yet.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed that bhikkhunīs build monasteries.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時助提婆達多比丘尼，共諸善比丘尼住，惱諸善比丘尼。諸善比丘尼，中前著衣持鉢，到親里知識檀越家，諸居士問言：「汝等安隱不？」答言：「不安隱！」「何以故？」答言：「與助提婆達多比丘尼共住，惱亂我等。」居士語言：「我為汝等別作房舍。」比丘尼言：「佛未聽我等別住房舍。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今聽諸比丘尼別作房舍。」</lzh>
(SarvDm38) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta lived together with the virtuous bhikkhunīs, and disturbed them. The virtuous bhikkhunīs, before midday, put on their robes, took their bowls, and went to the houses of their relatives, friends, and supporters. The householders asked: “Are you comfortable?” They answered: “We’re not comfortable.” “Why?” They answered: “We’re living together with the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta, and they’re disturbing us.” The householders said: “We’ll build a separate building for you.” The bhikkhunīs said: “The Buddha hasn’t allowed us to live in separate buildings yet.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s allowed that bhikkhunīs build separate buildings.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城，爾時助提婆達多比丘尼，喜在門外高處立看，諸居士呵責言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有德。』門外高處立看，如婬女。」是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽諸比丘尼門外高處立看。若立看，波夜提。」佛既不聽門外高處立看，故便於窓櫺中看。諸居士呵責言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有德。』在窓櫺中看，如王夫人、如大臣婦。」有比丘尼少欲知足，聞是事心不喜，是事白佛。佛種種因緣呵責：「云何名比丘尼，窓櫺中看？從今不得窓櫺中看。看者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm39) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta liked to stand outside the gate in a high place, and look around. The householders criticized them: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but they stand outside the gate in a high place and look around, like prostitutes.” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed that bhikkhunīs stand outside the gate in a high place and look around. If they stand and look, it’s a pācittiya.” When the Buddha had disallowed standing outside the gate in a high place and looking around, they then looked through the lattice of a window. The householders criticized them: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but they look through the lattice of a window, like queens and wives of high officials.” There were bhikkhunīs, who were of few wishes and knew moderation. When they heard of this matter, their minds weren’t pleased, and they told the Buddha of this matter. The Buddha criticized them with all kinds of reasons: “How can you be called bhikkhunīs, when you look through the lattice of a window? From now on, you may not look through the lattice of a window. If you look, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，與式叉摩尼受具戒，問言：「汝是女耶？」答言：「我有二根。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「是二根人不能女，不能女故，不聽出家受具戒。若已出家受具戒者，當作滅擯。何以故？二根人不能女，於我法中，不生善比尼法故。」</lzh>
(SarvDm40) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs gave the full ordination to a sikkhamānā and asked them: “Are you a woman?” They answered: “I’m intersex.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “An intersex person is an infertile woman. Because they’re an infertile woman, it’s not allowed for them to go forth and receive the full ordination. If they’ve already gone forth and received the full ordination, they should be permanently expelled. Why? An intersex person is an infertile woman, and therefore, in my dhamma, they don’t give birth to the good vinaya procedures.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，與式叉摩尼受具戒，問言：「汝是女人耶？」答言：「我小便時大便出、大便時小便出。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛。佛言：「二道合不能女，不應與出家受具戒。若已出家受具戒者，應作滅擯。何以故？二道合人不能女，於我法中，不生善法比尼故。」</lzh>
(SarvDm41) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs gave the full ordination to a sikkhamānā and asked her: “Are you a woman?” She answered: “When I urinate, it comes out through the anus, and when I defecate, it comes out through the vagina.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “A person whose anus and vagina are joined is an infertile woman. You shouldn’t give her the going forth and the full ordination. If she has already gone forth and received the full ordination, she should be permanently expelled. Why? A person whose anus and vagina are joined is an infertile woman, and therefore, in my dhamma, she doesn’t give birth to the good vinaya procedures.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，與式叉摩尼受具戒，問言：「汝有月忌不？」答言：「常有。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「常有月忌不能女，不應與出家受具戒。若已出家受具戒者，應作滅擯。何以故？常月忌不能女，於我法中，不生善法比尼故。」</lzh>
(SarvDm42) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs gave the full ordination to a sikkhamānā and asked her: “Do you menstruate?” She answered: “I constantly menstruate.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “A person who constantly menstruates is an infertile woman. You shouldn’t give her the going forth and the full ordination. If she has already gone forth and received the full ordination, she should be permanently expelled. Why? A person who constantly menstruates is an infertile woman, and therefore, in my dhamma, she doesn’t give birth to the good vinaya procedures.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，與式叉摩尼受具戒，問言：「汝有月忌止耶？」答言：「我常無月忌。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛。佛言：「常無月忌不能女，不聽出家受具戒。若已出家受具戒者，應作滅擯。何以故。常無月忌不能女，於我法中，不生善法比尼故。」</lzh>
(SarvDm43) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs gave the full ordination to a sikkhamānā and asked her: “Does your menses stop?” She answered: “I never menstruate.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “A person who never menstruates is an infertile woman. It’s not allowed for her go forth and receive the full ordination. If she has already gone forth and received the full ordination, she should be permanently expelled. Why? A person who never menstruates is an infertile woman, and therefore, in my dhamma, she doesn’t give birth to the good vinaya procedures.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，與式叉摩尼受具戒，問言：「汝是女人耶？」答言：「我少有女相。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛。佛言：「少有女相不能女，不聽出家受具戒。若已出家受具戒者，應作滅擯。何以故。少有女相不能女，於我法中，不生善法比尼故。」</lzh>
(SarvDm44) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs gave the full ordination to a sikkhamānā and asked her: “Are you a woman?” She answered: “I’ve few female characteristics.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “A person with few female characteristics is an infertile woman. It’s not allowed for her go forth and receive the full ordination. If she has already gone forth and received the full ordination, she should be permanently expelled. Why? A person with few female characteristics is an infertile woman, and therefore, in my dhamma, she doesn’t give birth to the good vinaya procedures.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有偷蘭難陀比丘尼，月忌未止而巷中行，血墮污地。諸居士呵責言：「不吉弊女。若有此月忌病，何以出巷中行？」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘尼，月忌未止出外行者，突吉羅。」有諸比丘尼貧窮，月忌未止，從他乞飯羹菜薪草燈燭，受諸苦惱。是事白佛，佛言：「應以衣裹出外行乞。」</lzh>
(SarvDm45) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī walked around in the streets when her menses hadn’t stopped yet. Blood dripped out and soiled the ground. The householders criticized her: “Inauspicious, inferior woman, when you’re sick with your menses, why do you go out and walk around in the streets?” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, if bhikkhunīs go out and walk around when their menses hasn’t stopped yet, it’s a dukkaṭa.” There were poor bhikkhunīs, who, when their menses hadn’t stopped yet, asked for rice, curries, vegetables, firewood, grass, lamps, and candles from others, and were suffering. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “You should wrap yourself with a cloth and walk around outside on almsround.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時長老大迦葉，中前著衣持鉢，從耆闍崛山向王舍城乞食。時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，早起城門中立，看出入男子誰好、誰醜？是大迦葉入，即唾言：「不吉！我早起見本外道。」大迦葉言：「惡女！我不責汝，我責阿難。」諸比丘尼以是事白佛，佛言：「諸比丘尼，不應唾比丘。若唾，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm46) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the venerable Mahākassapa, before midday, put on his robes, took his bowl, came down from Vulture’s peak, and entered Rājagaha on almsround. Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī got up early, and stood at the city gate. She watched men come and go to see who was good-looking and who was ugly. Mahākassapa entered, and she spat at him and said: “How inauspicious! I get up early, and see a former non-Buddhist renunciate.” Mahākassapa said: “Evil woman, I didn’t criticize you, I criticized Ānanda.”<note> This seems to refer to the incident at SN 16.11, also mentioned in Chinese parallels and several bhikkhunī khandhakas.</note> The bhikkhunīs told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “The bhikkhunīs shouldn’t spit at a bhikkhu. If someone spits, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時諸比丘尼，在比丘前懺悔，發露麁罪。諸比丘尼羞愧，不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘尼麁罪，不應比丘前發露，應向比丘尼前發露。」諸比丘尼發露時，不知是何罪？攝在何處？是事白佛，佛言：「應問比丘。作是言：『大德！作是事犯何罪？是罪何名？』比丘應答：『作是事者，得如是罪，攝在某處，是罪名某。』」</lzh>
(SarvDm47) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs did the confession in front of bhikkhus and disclosed coarse offenses. The bhikkhunīs were ashamed and didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, bhikkhunīs shouldn’t disclose coarse offenses in front of bhikkhus. They should disclose them in front of bhikkhunīs.” When the bhikkhunīs disclosed them, they didn’t know which offense it was, and which category it was included in. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “They should ask bhikkhus, like this: ‘Venerable, when one does this, one commits which offense? What is the offense called?’ The bhikkhu should answer: ‘When one does this, on incurs such-and-such and offense. It’s included in such-and-such category, and called such-and-such.’”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時比丘尼，月忌未止，至祇洹聽法，坐比丘敷具上，有血污之。陀驃力士子知眾僧敷具，餘日浣時嫌言：「諸比丘尼有如是病，何故坐僧敷具上？」是事白佛，佛言：「從今若比丘尼，月忌未止，不得坐僧敷具上。坐者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm48) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunīs, when their menses hadn’t stopped yet, went to Jeta’s grove to listen to the dhamma. They sat on the bhikkhus’ seats and left blood stains. The student Tuópiàolì recognized the sangha’s seats on another day when they were being washed, was upset and said: “When the bhikkhunīs have this illness, why do they sit on the sangha’s seats?” They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, a bhikkhunī, whose menses hasn’t stopped yet, may not sit on the sangha’s seats. If she sits there, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在王舍城。爾時助提婆達多比丘尼，立沽酒店，索價時受諸苦惱。諸居士呵責言：「汝出家人何以立酒店？」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘尼，不應立酒店。若作，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm49) The Buddha was in Rājagaha. At that time, the bhikkhunīs supporting Devadatta stood at a wineshop. When people asked for prices, they were uncomfortable. The householders criticized them: “Why do you renunciates stand at a wineshop?” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, a bhikkhunī shouldn’t stand at a wineshop. If she does, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時偷蘭難陀比丘尼，畜婢為眷屬。諸居士呵責言：「諸比丘尼自言：『善好有德。』畜婢為眷屬，如王夫人、大臣婦。」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽畜婢為眷屬。若畜為眷屬者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm50) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, Thullanandā bhikkhunī kept a slavewoman as her attendant. The householders criticized her: “These bhikkhunīs say of themselves: ‘We’re virtuous and have merit’, but they keep slavewomen as their attendants, like queens and wives of high officials.” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed to keep a slavewoman as one’s attendant. If someone keeps one as an attendant, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。偷蘭難陀比丘尼，度婬女為弟子。晨朝時到，著衣持鉢入舍衛城乞食，先共作不淨行諸居士，語諸居士：「我先共此比丘尼作不淨。」彼比丘尼愁惱。是事白佛，佛言：「從今不聽度婬女。若度者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm51) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. (At that time,) Thullanandā ordained a prostitute as her student. When the morning came, she put on her robes, took her bowl, and entered Sāvatthī on almsround. The householders with whom she had formerly had sex said to other householders: “We formerly had sex with that bhikkhunī.” That bhikkhunī felt anguished. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, it’s not allowed to ordain a prostitute. If someone ordains one, it’s a dukkaṭa.”<note> Cf. pc 115.</note>

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時長老迦留陀夷，中前著衣持鉢入城乞食，偷蘭難陀比丘尼隨後來至，以手摩觸迦留陀夷，迦留陀夷即以手脚蹴打臥地，語言：「弊女！汝唾摩訶迦葉，謂我亦爾耶？」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今比丘尼，不得摩觸比丘身。摩觸者犯罪。」</lzh>
(SarvDm52) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, the venerable Kāḷudāyī, before midday, put on his robes, took his bowl, and entered the city on almsround. Thullanandā bhikkhunī followed behind him, and touched him with her hand. Kāḷudāyī then kicked and beat her to the ground with his hands and feet, and said: “Evil woman, you spit at Mahākassapa, and you think you can also do this to me?” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, a bhikkhunī may not touch a bhikkhu’s body. If she touches him, she commits an offense.”

<lzh>佛在俱舍彌國。爾時迦留羅提舍比丘命過，是人有姊妹比丘尼七人：偷蘭難陀、周那難陀、提舍、優婆提舍、域多提舍、和梨提舍、勒叉多，有大力勢，祭祀被燒死屍。諸居士呵責言：「汝等出家入道，何以與死人飲食？」諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛，佛言：「從今諸比丘尼，不得祭祀死人。若祭祀者，突吉羅。」</lzh>
(SarvDm53) The Buddha was in Kosambī. At that time, At that time, Garudatissa bhikkhu passed away. He had seven sisters who were bhikkhunīs: Thullanandā, Sundarinandā, Tissā, Upatissā, Vata-tissā, Pālevā(ta)-tissā, and Rakkhatā. They were very capable. They offered a sacrifice to the dead, and burned the corpse. The householders criticized them: “You’ve gone forth and entered the path. Why do you give food and drinks to the dead?” The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “From now on, bhikkhunīs may not offer sacrifices to the dead. If someone offers a sacrifice, it’s a dukkaṭa.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有比丘失男根成女根，諸比丘不知云何？是事白佛。佛言：「即以先出家受具戒歲數，遣入比丘尼眾中。」</lzh>
(SarvDm54) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhu lost his male organs which turned into female organs. The bhikkhus didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “Sent them to join the bhikkhunī sangha with their previous seniority from when they went forth and received the full ordination.”

<lzh>佛在舍衛國。爾時有比丘尼，失女根得男根。諸比丘尼不知云何？是事白佛。佛言：「即以先出家受具戒歲數，遣入比丘眾中。」</lzh>
(SarvDm55) The Buddha was in Sāvatthī. At that time, a bhikkhunī lost her female organs and obtained male organs. The bhikkhunīs didn’t know what to do. They told the Buddha of this matter, and the Buddha said: “Sent them to join the bhikkhu sangha with their previous seniority from when they went forth and received the full ordination.”

<lzh-fascicle-end>十誦律卷第四十</lzh-fascicle-end>
<en-fascicle-end>Sarvāstivāda Vinaya, fascicle 40.</en-fascicle-end>
