MuVb_ss10


<lzh>度他婦女學處第十</lzh>
The 10th training precept: Ordaining someone’s wife.

<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>緣處同前。時勝光王有大軍將，名能執劍，常出征伐。其妻在室，為欲情所惱，遂與外人交通。夫後歸來，聞知此事遂加鞭杖，雖受苦楚而不懲息，軍將便念：「我為國王降伏他邑令使調順，如何己妻不能整肅？」作是念已，便往白王：「唯願大王！與女人立制，若有不修婦德污染憲章者，罪當極法。」王言：「善事。」次於後時有將軍女違斯國憲，夫與離別，白王依法，其女遂往告法官曰：「我之一過，幸願相容。」法官曰：「此無容恕。」女曰：「必不免死，請活七年。」官云：「不可。」「若不許者，如是乃至六、五、四、三、二、一年中願存活命。」官云：「不可。」「如是七月乃至一月放活。」官云：「不可。」「若爾幸留七日。」官云：「隨意。」既蒙許已作如是念：「我活七日當必斬形。」泣涕交流修諸福業。</lzh>
Location as before. Then king Pasenadi had a great general, called Capable Sword-Wielder, who often went into battle. His wife remained at home, and troubled by feelings of desire, she finally had sex with an outsider. When the husband returned, and heard and knew about the affair, he lashed her with a whip and a cane. Even though she suffered, she didn’t learn from it and stop. The general thought: “For the king of the country, I defeat other districts and make them submissive. How am I not able to discipline my own wife?” Having thought this, he went and said to the king: “May the great king establish a rule for women. If they don’t keep a woman’s moral conduct, but follow a dirty, defiled example, there will be the most severe punishment.” The king said: “That’s a good thing.” Then at a later time, the general’s wife disobeyed this national law. The husband separated from her and told the king to apply the law. The woman then went and said to the judge: “Please tolerate this one transgression.” The judge said: “There’s no room for mercy here.” The woman said: “If I can’t avoid death, I ask for my life for seven years.” The judge said: “That’s not possible.” “If that’s not permitted, … likewise down to six, five, four, three, two, one year, please let me live.” The judge said: “That’s not possible.” “Likewise seven months, down to one month, let me live.” The judge said: “That’s not possible.” “In that case, just give me seven days.” The judge said: “As you like.” When she had been granted, she thought: “My life will end in seven days”, and weeping and with tears flowing, she engaged in meritorious activities.

<lzh>時吐羅難陀尼，於小食時執持衣鉢入城乞食，至彼女家見其啼泣，報言：「少女！因何心苦流淚而行施耶？」答曰：「我為自身死將不遠。」尼曰：「勿作如是不吉祥言。」女即行啼次第陳說，尼曰：「若爾，何不捨俗出家？」答曰：「誰復於我共相携接？」尼曰：「我與出家。」女便禮足，報言：「聖者！施我性命。」吐羅難陀即與出家。執劍將軍聞彼惡女今已出家，遂作是語：「豈可彼入無畏城耶？待七日滿當斷其命。」尼聞是語，即將其女為求朋扇，即往十二眾尼處告言：「此是某官人女，已歸依佛、已歸依法，今歸汝等。」次第向說。十二眾曰：「斯為善事，我今攝受，誰復敢言？若有輒來吾當自解。」又將其女向大世主處，白言：</lzh>
Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī, at breakfast time, took her robe and bowl, and entered the city on almsround. She reached that woman’s house, saw her weeping, and said: “Young woman, because of what mental pain do you cry and practise charity?” She replied: “Because I’ll die soon.” The bhikkhunī said: “Don’t say such inauspicious words.” The woman then wailed, and subsequently explained the matter. The bhikkhunī said: “If that’s so, why don’t you give up lay life and go forth?” She answered: “Who would take me in?” The bhikkhunī said: “I’ll give you the going forth.” The woman then paid respect at her feet and replied: “Noble one, you’re giving me my life.” Thullanandā then gave her the going forth. When general Sword-Wielder heard that the evil woman had now gone forth, he said: “How could she possibly enter the city without fear? When the seven days are over, she’ll be killed.” When the bhikkhunī heard these words, she took the woman to seek out friends. They then went to the group-of-twelve bhikkhunīs and said: “This is official So-and-so’s wife, who has taken refuge in the Buddha and the dhamma, and now takes refuge in you.” Then they explained the matter. The group-of-twelve said: “This is a good thing, and we now support you. Who would dare to speak up? If they come, we’ll release you ourselves.” They also took the woman to Mahāpajāpatī and said:

<lzh>「聖者！當知此是某官人女，身心歸依佛法僧寶，今來歸依大世主足。」彼問其故，即便具說。世主告言：「姊妹！此無行人何所用為？」吐羅難陀復將此女詣勝鬘夫人處，告言：「夫人！此是某官人女，已歸三寶，今歸夫人。」彼問其故，具說如前。夫人曰：「此無行女何因輒度？與其出家斯成非法。此事已過，我為白王。」既至王所具說其緣，王曰：「此實非法，然是事難裁。若依法殺戮便傷佛教，我招惡響。若今釋放復損刑科，進退兩途難為處斷。」即令使告執劍將軍具說其事。將軍覆奏：「所立嚴令眾並同知，如何此女王欲違制而釋放耶？」王曰：「此宜放捨因制餘人。」將軍聞已廣作譏嫌：「云何度此非法女人令出家也？」</lzh>
“Noble one, you should know that this is official So-and-so’s wife. She has taken refuge in the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha jewels. She now came to take refuge at Mahāpajāpatī’s feet.” (Mahāpajāpatī) asked for the reason, and they explained it fully. Mahāpajāpatī said: “Sisters, of what use is this immoral person?” Thullanandā then took that woman to queen Sirimālā and said: “Queen, this is official So-and-so’s wife. She has taken refuge in the three jewels, and now takes refuge in the queen.” (The queen) asked for the reason, and they fully explained it as before. The queen said: “Why did you ordain this immoral woman? Giving her the going forth is against the law. This transgression has already happened. I’ll speak to the king.” Then she went to the king and fully explained the matter to him. The king said: “This is truly against the law. But the matter is difficult to resolve. If we follow the law and kill her, we’ll harm the Buddha’s teaching, and I’ll incur a bad reputation. But if we now release her, it’ll cause harm to our legal system. We’ll run into difficulties no matter what we do.” Then he had general Sword-Wielder informed fully about the matter. The general replied: “The established strict order was made known to the population. How can the king want to go against the law and release this woman?” The king said: “It’s proper to release her because she’s under the rule of other people.”<note>I.e. the sangha.</note> When the general heard this, he was very upset: “How could they ordain this unlawful woman and make her go forth?”

<lzh>尼白苾芻，苾芻白佛。佛以此緣同前集尼問實訶責，乃至制其學處，應如是說：</lzh>
The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha gathered the bhikkhunīs for this reason as before, asked if it was true, and criticized her, down to: “I’ll lay down another training precept. You should recite it like this:

<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>「若復苾芻尼，知他婦女作非法事，眾人共嫌為夫所棄，并白王知，度令出家，僧伽伐尸沙。」</lzh>
‘If a bhikkhunī knows that someone’s wife has engaged in unlawful activities, that the people are all upset about her, that the husband has rejected her and also informed the king, and she gives her the going forth, it’s a saṅghādisesa.’”

<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>尼謂吐羅難陀，或復餘人。</lzh>
“A bhikkhunī” means Thullanandā, or any other person.

<lzh>知謂自知，廣說乃至如此之人不合出家，若有度者得眾教罪。</lzh>
“Knowing” means she knows herself, to be explained in detail, down to “such a person is unfit for ordination”. If she ordains her, she incurs a saṅghādisesa.