MuVb_ss13


<lzh>不捨惡見學處第十三</lzh>
The 13th training precept: Not giving up a wrong view.

<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>緣在室羅伐城，有一苾芻尼名曰黑色，曾作外道，每恒共諸苾芻尼鬪諍紛擾，常言：「捨佛法僧。非但此沙門釋女持戒德行，情懷質直純善梵行，餘處亦有如斯善人，我當就彼而修梵行。」諸尼以緣白諸苾芻，苾芻白佛。佛告諸尼：「應可屏諫此黑色尼，若復餘尼。作如是諫：『汝黑色尼！鬪諍之時，勿言：「我捨佛法僧。非但此沙門釋女有持戒德行，情懷質直純善梵行，餘處亦有如斯善人，我當就彼而修梵行。」黑色尼！汝今可捨如是惡見。』」諸尼依教作屏諫時，彼尼於事堅執不捨，作如是語：「唯此是實，餘皆虛妄。」尼白苾芻苾芻白佛，佛告諸尼：「汝等應與作白四羯磨諫黑色尼，鳴犍稚乃至尼眾盡集，一尼作白，次作羯磨。</lzh>
At Sāvatthī. There was a bhikkhunī named Kālī who had previously been a non-Buddhist renunciate. She continually quarreled with the bhikkhunīs, and when agitated, she often said: “I renounce the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. There aren’t just these renunciates who are Sakyan daughters that keep precepts and virtuous conduct, and strive for a sincere and pure monastic life. In other places, there are also such good persons. I’ll go there and practise the monastic life with them.” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha said to the bhikkhunīs: “You should admonish this Kālī bhikkhunī, or any other bhikkhunī, in a secluded place. You should admonish her like this: ‘When you, Kālī bhikkhunī, quarrel, don’t say: “I renounce the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. There aren’t just these renunciates who are Sakyan daughters that keep precepts and virtuous conduct, and strive for a sincere and pure monastic life. In other places, there are also such good persons. I’ll go there and practise the monastic life with them.” Kālī bhikkhunī, please give up this wrong view now.’” Based on this instruction, the bhikkhunīs admonished her in a secluded place, but the bhikkhunī held firmly on to this matter and didn’t give it up. She said: “Only this is true, everything else is false.” The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha said to the bhikkhunīs: “You should carry out a formal act with a motion as fourth to admonish Kālī bhikkhunī. Strike the bell, and when the bhikkhunī sangha have all gathered, one bhikkhunī carries out the motion, and then the announcements:

<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

<lzh>「『大德尼僧伽聽！此黑色苾芻尼自起惡見，鬪諍時作如是語：「我今捨佛法僧。非但此沙門釋女有持戒德行，情懷質直純善梵行者，餘處亦有如斯善人，我當就彼而修梵行。」諸苾芻尼而往屏諫，屏諫之時惡見不捨，云：「此是實餘皆虛妄。」若苾芻尼僧伽時至聽者，苾芻尼僧伽應許苾芻尼僧伽今與此黑色苾芻尼作不捨惡見羯磨。白如是。』次作羯磨。</lzh>
‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This Kālī bhikkhunī has given rise to wrong view. When quarreling, she said: “I now renounce the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. There aren’t just these renunciates who are Sakyan daughters that keep precepts and virtuous conduct, and strive for a sincere and pure monastic life. In other places, there are also such good persons. I’ll go there and practise the monastic life with them.” The bhikkhunīs went to a secluded place to admonish her. When admonished in a secluded place, she didn’t give up the wrong view and said: “This is true, everything else is false.” If the right time has come for the bhikkhunī sangha to allow it, the bhikkhunī sangha should approve that the bhikkhunī sangha now carries out a formal act against this Kālī bhikkhunī for not giving up a wrong view. This is the motion.’ Next, carry out the announcements:

<lzh>「『大德尼僧伽聽！此黑色苾芻尼自起惡見，鬪諍時作如是語：「我今捨佛法僧。非但此沙門釋女有持戒德行，情懷質直純善梵行者，餘處亦有如斯善人，我當就彼而修梵行。」諸苾芻尼而往屏諫，屏諫之時惡見不捨，云：「此是實，餘皆虛妄。」苾芻尼僧伽今與此黑色苾芻尼作不捨惡見羯磨。若諸具壽聽與黑色苾芻尼作不捨惡見羯磨者默然，若不許者說。此是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是作。『苾芻尼僧伽已與黑色苾芻尼作不捨惡見羯磨竟。苾芻尼僧伽已聽許，由其默然故，我今如是持。』」時諸尼眾依教與作白四羯磨諫彼尼時，於事堅執惡見不捨，云：「此是實，餘皆虛妄，我何所執令我捨耶？」即以此緣，尼白苾芻，苾芻白佛。佛以此事同前集尼問實訶責，廣說乃至制其學處，應如是說：</lzh>
‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This Kālī bhikkhunī has given rise to wrong view. When quarreling, she said: “I now renounce the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. There aren’t just these renunciates who are Sakyan daughters that keep precepts and virtuous conduct, and strive for a sincere and pure monastic life. In other places, there are also such good persons. I’ll go there and practise the monastic life with them.” The bhikkhunīs went to a secluded place to admonish her. When admonished in a secluded place, she didn’t give up the wrong view and said: “This is true, everything else is false.” The bhikkhunī sangha now carries out a formal act against this Kālī bhikkhunī for not giving up a wrong view. If the long-lived ones allow to carry out a formal act against Kālī bhikkhunī for not giving up a wrong view, you should remain silent. If you don’t approve, you should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and third should be done likewise. ‘The bhikkhunī sangha has carried out a formal act against Kālī bhikkhunī for not giving up a wrong view. The bhikkhunī sangha has approved, therefore you’re silent. I now remember it thus.’” 

<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

Then, when, based on these instructions, the bhikkhunī sangha carried out a formal act with a motion as fourth to admonish that bhikkhunī, she held firmly on to the matter and didn’t give up her wrong view. She said: “This is true, everything else is false. How could you make me give up what I hold on to?” For this reason, the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha gathered the bhikkhunīs because of this matter as before, asked if it was true, and criticized her, as explained in detail, down to: “I’ll lay down another training precept. You should recite it like this:

<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>「若復苾芻尼，共諸苾芻尼鬪諍紛擾，作如是語：『我捨佛法僧。非但此沙門釋女具戒具德有勝善法，於餘沙門亦具戒具德有勝善法，我當詣彼修習梵行。』時諸苾芻尼語言：『汝可捨此罪惡之見。』作如是諫時捨者善。若不捨者，應可再三慇懃正諫，隨教應詰，令捨是事。捨者善；若不捨者，僧伽伐尸沙。」</lzh>
‘If a bhikkhunī quarrels with the bhikkhunīs, and when agitated, says: “I renounce the Buddha, the dhamma, and the sangha. There aren’t just these renunciates who are Sakyan daughters that are endowed with precepts, endowed with virtue, and have a superior dhamma. Other renunciates also are endowed with precepts, endowed with virtue, and have a superior dhamma. I’ll go there to practise the monastic life”, then the bhikkhunīs should say: “Please give up this blameworthy, wrong view”. When they carry out this admonishment and she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, they should again admonish her earnestly and correctly three times. They should reprove her according to the instructions to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, it’s a saṅghādisesa.’”

<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>若復苾芻尼者，謂黑色尼，或復餘尼。廣釋同前。</lzh>
“A bhikkhunī” means Kālī bhikkhunī, or any other bhikkhunī. To be explained in detail as before.

<lzh>如是諫時捨者善。不捨者應可再三諫，白四羯磨乃至僧伽伐尸沙，廣如前說。</lzh>
When they admonish her in this way and she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, they should admonish her again three times with a formal act with a motion as fourth until it becomes a saṅghādisesa, as explained in detail before.

<lzh>此中犯相其事云何？若苾芻尼別諫時，事不捨者皆得惡作。若作白時捨者善，不捨者得麁罪。初羯磨時捨者善，不捨得罪同前。第二番了時，亦得麁罪。若第三番羯磨結了之時而不捨者，得僧伽伐尸沙。若作非法而眾和合、若作如法而眾不和合、若作似法而眾和合、若作似法而眾不和合、若不如法如律如佛所教而秉法者，作法不成，彼皆無犯。彼苾芻尼，若於座上告大眾言：「大德！我苾芻尼某甲，犯僧伽伐尸沙罪。」者善。若不說者，乃至其罪未如法說悔已來，若共餘苾芻尼作白羯磨乃至白四法，一一皆得惡作罪。</lzh>
Herein, what are the factors for committing this offense? If bhikkhunīs admonish her individually and she doesn’t give up this matter, she incurs a dukkaṭa each time. If they carry out the motion and she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, she incurs a thullaccaya. If she gives it up at the first announcement, it’s fine. If not, she incurs a thullaccaya as before. After the second one, she also incurs a thullaccaya. If she hasn’t given it up by the time the third announcement is finished, she incurs a saṅghādisesa. If they do it against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if they do it according to dhamma in an unharmonious assembly, if they do it with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if they do it with what resembles dhamma in an unharmonious assembly, if it’s not according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction, and they maintain this procedure, the procedure doesn’t stand, and she’s without any offense. If that bhikkhunī, while sitting on her seat, tells the sangha: “Venerables, I, bhikkhunī So-and-so, have committed a saṅghādisesa offense”, it’s fine. If she doesn’t say that, or if the offense hasn’t been fully confessed according to dhamma, and the other bhikkhunīs carry out the motion and announcements and complete the procedure with a motion as fourth, each of them incurs a dukkaṭa offense.<note>(I believe this means that if the procedure is faulty but the offender accepts it and says it’s a saṅghādisesa, then it’s ok. If she doesn’t say it, the other bhikkhunīs incur a dukkata for a wrong procedure.)</note>