MuVb_ss14


<lzh>說他有愛恚學處第十四</lzh>
The 14th training precept: Saying others have desire and hatred.

<h2>Origin Story</h2>

<lzh>緣在室羅伐城，時吐羅難陀苾芻尼，常共諸尼鬪諍紛擾懷恨而住。諸苾芻尼言：「聖者！莫為鬪諍懷恨而住。」答言：「汝等有愛、恚、怖、癡，於鬪諍人有遮、不遮。」尼以此事白諸苾芻，苾芻白佛。佛告諸苾芻尼：「應屏諫吐羅難陀尼，言：『勿作是語：「汝等有愛、恚、怖、癡，於鬪諍人有遮、不遮。」姊妹！可止此語，應捨此見。』」諸苾芻尼依佛依教諫時仍不改悔，云：「此法實，餘皆虛妄。」尼白苾芻，苾芻白佛。佛告諸尼：「應與吐羅難陀尼白四羯磨，當如是作：鳴揵稚、敷座褥，僧伽悉集，一尼作白：</lzh>
At Sāvatthī. Then Thullanandā bhikkhunī often quarreled with the bhikkhunīs, and kept on being agitated and harboring a grudge. The bhikkhunīs said: “Noble one, don’t quarrel and keep on harboring a grudge.” She answered: “You have desire, hatred, fear, and delusion. You prevent some people from quarreling, and not others.” The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus about this matter, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha said to the bhikkhunīs: “You should admonish Thullanandā bhikkhunī in a secluded place and say: ‘Don’t say: “You have desire, hatred, fear, and delusion. You prevent some people from quarreling, and not others.” Sister, please stop speaking like this. You should give up this view.’” When, based on the Buddha and based on the instruction, the bhikkhunīs admonished her, she still didn’t repent, and said: “This thing is true, everything else is false.” The bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha said to the bhikkhunīs: “You should do a formal act with a motion as fourth against Thullanandā bhikkhunī. You should do it as follows: Strike the bell, prepare seats, and when the sangha have all gathered, one bhikkhunī carries out the motion:

<h2>Saṅghakamma</h2>

<lzh>「『大德尼僧伽聽！此吐羅難陀苾芻尼，常共諸尼鬪諍紛擾懷恨而住。諸尼諫言：「聖者！勿鬪諍紛擾。」答言：「汝等有愛、恚、怖、癡，於鬪諍人有遮、不遮。」堅執不捨「唯此法實，餘皆虛妄。」若苾芻尼僧伽時至聽者，苾芻尼僧伽應許，此吐羅難陀苾芻尼作不捨有愛恚怖癡白四羯磨。白如是。』次作羯磨。</lzh>
‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This Thullanandā bhikkhunī often quarrels with the bhikkhunīs, and keeps on being agitated and harboring a grudge. The bhikkhunīs admonished her: “Noble one, don’t quarrel and be agitated.” She answered: “You have desire, hatred, fear, and delusion. You prevent some people from quarreling, and not others.” She held firmly on to it, didn’t give it up (and said): “Only this thing is true, everything else is false.” If the right time has come for the bhikkhunī sangha to allow it, the bhikkhunī sangha should approve to carry out a formal act with a motion as fourth against this Thullanandā bhikkhunī for not giving up the “having desire, hatred, fear, and delusion” issue. This is the motion.’ Next, carry out the announcements:

<lzh>「『大德尼僧伽聽！此吐羅難陀苾芻尼，常共諸尼鬪諍紛擾懷恨而住。諸尼諫言：「聖者！勿鬪諍紛擾。」答言：「汝等有愛、恚、怖、癡，於鬪諍人有遮、不遮。」堅執不捨「唯此法實，餘皆虛妄。」苾芻尼僧伽今與此吐羅難陀苾芻尼作不捨有愛恚怖癡白四羯磨。若諸具壽聽與此吐羅難陀苾芻尼作不捨有愛恚怖癡羯磨者默然，若不許者說。此是初羯磨。』第二、第三亦如是說。『苾芻尼僧伽已與吐羅尼作不捨愛恚怖癡白四羯磨竟。苾芻尼僧伽已聽許，由其默然故，我今如是持。』如是再三慇懃正諫，隨教應詰，令捨是事。」諸苾芻尼聞佛教已，與吐羅尼再三白四羯磨，彼懷堅執而不悔捨。復以此緣尼白苾芻，苾芻白佛。佛以此緣，同前集尼問實訶責，乃至制學，應如是說：</lzh>
‘Venerable bhikkhunīs, may the sangha listen. This Thullanandā bhikkhunī often quarrels with the bhikkhunīs, and keeps on being agitated and harboring a grudge. The bhikkhunīs admonished her: “Noble one, don’t quarrel and be agitated.” She answered: “You have desire, hatred, fear, and delusion. You prevent some people from quarreling, and not others.” She held firmly on to it, didn’t give it up (and said): “Only this thing is true, everything else is false.” The bhikkhunī sangha now carries out a formal act with a motion as fourth against this Thullanandā bhikkhunī for not giving up the “having desire, hatred, fear, and delusion” issue. If the long-lived ones allow to carry out a formal act with a motion as fourth against this Thullanandā bhikkhunī for not giving up the “having desire, hatred, fear, and delusion” issue, you should remain silent. If you don’t approve, you should speak. This is the first announcement.’ The second and third should be recited likewise. ‘The bhikkhunī sangha has carried out a formal act with a motion as fourth against Thullā bhikkhunī for not giving up the “having desire, hatred, fear, and delusion” issue. The bhikkhunī sangha has approved, therefore you’re silent. I now remember it thus.’ 

<h2>Origin Story (continued)</h2>

You should properly admonish her in this way three more times. You should reprove her according to the instructions to make her give up this matter.” When the bhikkhunīs had heard the Buddha’s instructions, they again did three (admonishments) in a formal act with a motion as fourth against Thullā bhikkhunī. She held firmly on to it and didn’t repent and give it up. For this reason, the bhikkhunīs told the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus told the Buddha. The Buddha gathered the bhikkhunīs for this reason as before, asked if it was true, and criticized her, down to: “I’ll lay down another training precept. You should recite it like this:

<h2>Final Ruling</h2>

<lzh>「若復苾芻尼，共諸苾芻尼鬪諍紛擾。諸苾芻尼語是苾芻尼言：『姊妹！莫鬪諍紛擾。』此苾芻尼作如是語：『汝有愛、恚、怖、癡，於鬪諍人有遮、不遮。』諸苾芻尼語言：『大德！他諫誨時莫作是語：「汝有愛、恚、怖、癡，於鬪諍人有遮、不遮。」姊妹！可止此語。』諸苾芻尼如是諫時，捨者善。若不捨者，應可再三慇懃正諫，隨教應詰，令捨是事。捨者善；若不捨者，僧伽伐尸沙。」</lzh>
‘If a bhikkhunī quarrels with the bhikkhunīs and is agitated, the bhikkhunīs should say to her: “Sister, don’t quarrel and be agitated.” If that bhikkhunī answers: “You have desire, hatred, fear, and delusion. You prevent some people from quarreling, and not others”, the bhikkhunīs should say: “Venerable, when others admonish you, don’t say: ‘You have desire, hatred, fear and delusion. You prevent some people from quarreling, and not others.’ Sister, please stop speaking like this.” When the bhikkhunīs admonish her like this and she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, they should again admonish her earnestly and correctly three times. They should reprove her according to the instructions to make her give up this matter. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, it’s a saṅghādisesa.’”

<h2>Explanations</h2>

<lzh>尼謂吐羅難陀，或復餘尼。</lzh>
“A bhikkhunī” means Thullanandā, or any other bhikkhunī.

<lzh>諸苾芻尼語者，此法中尼，謂諫令止鬪諍紛擾。若言有愛恚怖癡，可作屏諫，捨者善。若不改悔，同前再三白四羯磨，慇懃正諫隨教應詰。捨者善，不捨者得眾教罪。</lzh>
“The bhikkhunīs should say” means bhikkhunīs in this dhamma, and it means admonishing to make her stop quarreling and being agitated. If she says that they have desire, hatred, fear, and delusion, they should do an admonishment in a secluded place. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If she doesn’t repent, they should again do three (admonishments) in a formal act with a motion as fourth as before. They should admonish her earnestly and correctly, and reprove her according to the instructions. If she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, she incurs a saṅghādisesa offense.

<lzh>此中犯相其事云何？屏諫之時捨者善，若不捨得惡作罪。作白之時捨者善，不捨者窣吐羅底也。初羯磨時捨者善，不捨亦得麁罪。第二羯磨時亦然。第三羯磨未竟時捨者善，不捨者得眾教罪。無犯者，若作非法而眾和合、若作如法而眾不和合、若作似法而眾和合、若作似法而眾不和合、若不如法如律如佛所教而秉法，並皆無犯。時彼苾芻尼，若於座上告大眾言：「大德！我苾芻尼某甲，犯僧伽伐尸沙罪。」者善。若不說者，乃至其罪未如法說悔已來，若復共餘苾芻尼作白羯磨乃至白四法，一一皆得惡作罪。又無犯者，初造過人，或癡狂、心亂、痛惱所纏。</lzh>
Herein, what are the factors for committing this offense? When admonishing her in a secluded place, if she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, she incurs a dukkaṭa offense. When they carry out the motion and she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, it’s a thullaccaya. If she gives it up at the first announcement, it’s fine. If not, she also incurs a thullaccaya offense. At the second announcement, the same. When the third announcement isn’t finished yet and she gives it up, it’s fine. If not, she incurs a saṅghādisesa. There’s no offense: If they do it against the dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if they do it according to dhamma in an unharmonious assembly, if they do it with what resembles dhamma in a harmonious assembly, if they do it with what resembles dhamma in an unharmonious assembly, if it’s not according to dhamma, according to vinaya, according to the Buddha’s instruction, and they maintain this procedure, she’s without any offense. If that bhikkhunī, while sitting on her seat, tells the sangha: “Venerables, I, bhikkhunī So-and-so, have committed a saṅghādisesa offense”, it’s fine. If she doesn’t say that, or if the offense hasn’t been fully confessed according to dhamma, and the other bhikkhunīs carry out the motion and announcements and complete the procedure with a motion as fourth, each of them incurs a dukkaṭa offense.<note>(I believe this means that if the procedure is faulty but the offender accepts it and says it’s a saṅghādisesa, then it’s ok. If she doesn’t say it, the other bhikkhunīs incur a dukkata for a wrong procedure.)</note> Also without offense are the first offender, one who is mad, one whose mind is distracted, and one who is afflicted with illness.