MgVb_pc91




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時有夫婦出家。時夫摩訶羅來與食。在邊而立。其夫說先時女人惡事。聞已不喜便作是言。短壽摩訶羅不識恩義。不應說者而說之。諸比丘尼呵言。阿梨耶。此上尊眾不得作此罵詈。即語比丘尼言。此短壽摩訶羅不知恩義。不應說者而說之。
諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼來。來已問言。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。此是惡事。從今日後不聽。比丘尼對面呵罵比丘。佛告大愛道。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, a husband and a wife had gone forth. When the husband Mahallaka came, she gave him food, and stood at one side. Her husband spoke of previous times, when the woman had done unwholesome things. Hearing that, she was unhappy and said: “Short-lived old man, you don’t know gratitude. What shouldn’t be talked about, you talk about.” The bhikkhunīs criticized her: “Venerable, you may not scold a respected bhikkhu like this.” She then said to the bhikkhunīs: “This short-lived old man doesn’t know gratitude. What shouldn’t be talked about, he talks about.”
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon her.” When she came, he asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “This is an unwholesome thing. From now on, it’s no longer allowed for a bhikkhunī to criticize and scold a bhikkhu face to face.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼對面呵罵比丘者波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī criticizes and scolds a bhikkhu face to face, it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。對面者四目相對。呵罵者言。短壽摩訶羅不善不識恩義波夜提。波夜提者如上說。比丘尼不得對面呵罵比丘。若兄弟親里出家。其人不持戒行。亦不得呵罵。應當軟語教誨。若是年少者。應語沙路醯多。莫作此事。汝今不學何時當學耶。汝後弟子亦當學汝作不善。若老者。應語沙路醯多。汝今不學者待至老死時乃學耶。比丘亦不得對面呵罵。比丘尼言。剃髮婦女婬妷婦女。乃至言摩呵梨汝不善不知恩義。可得軟語教如上說。若比丘對面呵罵比丘尼越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Face to face” means the four eyes facing each other. “Criticizing and scolding” means saying: “This short-lived old man is no good and doesn’t know gratitude”; this is a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. A bhikkhunī may not criticize and scold a bhikkhu face-to-face. If her brothers or other relatives have gone forth, and they practise not keeping the precepts, she also may not criticize or scold them. She should teach them with gentle words. If they’re young, she should say: “Relative, don’t act like this. If you don’t train now, when will you train? Later, your students will learn to do the unwholesome from you.” If they’re old, she should say: “Relative, if you don’t train now, are you waiting until you’re old and die to train?” A bhikkhu also may not criticize and scold a bhikkhunī face to face: “This shaven-headed woman is a lewd woman.” … “Old woman, you’re no good and don’t know gratitude.” He may teach her with gentle words as above. If a bhikkhu criticizes and scolds a bhikkhunī face to face, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.