MgVb_pc76




Origin Story


<beginchinese>佛住舍衛城。爾時比丘尼僧語偷蘭難陀言。汝能為僧乞迦絺那衣不。答言能。即往無信家語言。大福德。汝能施僧迦絺那衣不。答言能。僧自恣已語偷蘭難陀言。得迦絺那衣未。答言我知。即到其家語言。長壽。迦絺那衣辦未。答言我知。尋復往索。比丘尼復言我知。如是衣時已過。諸比丘尼語大愛道。大愛道即以是事往白世尊。佛言。呼比丘尼來。來已佛問。汝實爾不。答言實爾。佛言。汝云何至不能辦衣家。為僧索迦絺那衣。從今已後不聽。佛告大愛道瞿曇彌。依止舍衛城住比丘尼皆悉令集。乃至已聞者當重聞。<endchinese>

The Buddha was staying at Sāvatthī. At that time, the bhikkhunī sangha asked Thullanandā: “Can you ask for a kaṭhina robe for the sangha?” She answered: “I can.” Then she went to a faithless household, and said: “People of great merit, can you offer a kaṭhina robe to the sangha?” They answered: “We can.” After the sangha had done the pavāraṇā ceremony, they asked Thullanandā: “Have you obtained the kaṭhina robe?” She answered: “I’ll see to it.” Then she went to that household and said: “Long-lived ones, have you prepared the kaṭhina robe?” They answered: “We’ll see to it.” (The sangha) continued to go and ask her, and the bhikkhunī (Thullanandā) said again: “I’ll see to it.” In that way, the robe season passed. 
The bhikkhunīs told Mahāpajāpatī, and she went to the World-honored One, and informed him of this matter. The Buddha said: “Summon that bhikkhunī.” When she came, the Buddha asked her: “Did you really do this?” She answered: “I really did this.” The Buddha said: “Why did you go to a household that couldn’t prepare the robe to ask for a kaṭhina robe for the sangha? From now on, it’s no longer allowed.” The Buddha told Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī: “Convene all the bhikkhunīs living in the vicinity of Sāvatthī. … Those who have already heard it should listen again:




Final Ruling


<beginchinese>若比丘尼 詣不能辦衣家。為僧乞迦絺那衣。波夜提。<endchinese>

If a bhikkhunī goes to a household that can’t prepare a robe, and asks for a kaṭhina robe for the sangha, it’s a pācittiya.”




Explanation


<beginchinese>比丘尼者如上說。不信者。無力與希望處弱。衣者欽婆羅衣［疊＊毛］衣乃至驅牟提衣。乞者為僧求迦絺那衣。衣時過不得者波夜提。波夜提者如上說。若比丘尼能為僧求迦絺那衣者。應好著意求。不得至不信家求。當至有信家眷屬多者乞。若前人言我自知。當復語言汝定與不。勿令過衣時。亦當相望其人。必不能辦者。當更餘處求。亦應自籌量。不能辦者不應與僧求。若已許僧求衣。不自勤求不使人求。又不自語僧。令衣時過者波夜提波夜提者如上說。若比丘往詣不信家。為僧求迦絺那衣者越比尼罪。是故世尊說。<endchinese>

“A bhikkhunī” is as explained above. “Faithless” means without means to give, a place where the expectations are low. “A robe” means a woolen robe, a cotton robe, … a linen robe. “Asking” means asking for a kaṭhina robe for the sangha. When the robe season is over and one hasn’t obtained it, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhunī is able to ask for a kaṭhina robe for the sangha, she should consider well who to ask, and not go to a faithless household to ask. She should go to a faithful household with many family members to ask. If people previously said: “We’ll see to it ourselves,” she should speak with them again: “Will you definitely give it? Don’t let the robe season go by.” She also should expect that those people might not be able to prepare it. Then she should ask at other places. And she should assess, and not ask for offerings to the sangha from someone who can’t prepare them. If someone has already been authorized by the sangha to ask for the robe, and doesn’t make an effort to ask herself, nor has others ask, and also doesn’t tell the sangha, but lets the robe season pass, it’s a pācittiya. “Pācittiya” is as explained above. If a bhikkhu goes to a faithless household to ask for a kaṭhina robe for the sangha, he breaks a minor vinaya rule. This is what the World-honored One said.